R
3 1
the September 11, 2001, attacks on the Pentagon and the World Trade Center ushered in a dual crisis for deterrence. First, September 11 led to new
doubts about whether the strategy of deterrence still works. In particular, a
threat to retaliate seems unlikely to be effective against people who already
plan to kill themselves in a suicide attack. Second, the September 11 tragedy
helped bring about an apparent shift away from deterrence in U.S. policy.
The George W. Bush administration began emphasizing a new doctrine of
preemption, which it applied to rogue states as well as to terrorists. Many
observers concluded that the Bush Doctrine meant that deterrence had been
cast aside by U.S. leaders.2
Both inferences are incorrect. Although there are limits to deterrence,
it is still possible to achieve some deterrence against both rogue states and
terrorists. And the Bush administration did not abandon deterrence; it continued to be a component of U.S. national security strategy. The twin challenges posed by suicide terrorism and the U.S. embrace of preemption did,
however, prompt many scholars to reexamine deterrence, leading to an
outpouring of studies seeking to assess that strategy’s potential against the
“asymmetric” threats that have dominated U.S. concerns in the early years
of the twenty- fi rst century.3
Despite rhetoric suggesting that “September 11 changed everything,” it is
not the case that all pre–September 11 experience was rendered irrelevant.
This chapter steps back from the more recent discussions of deterrence to
identify certain themes in deterrence theory and practice before the al- Qaeda
attacks that could prove helpful in ascertaining potential uses of deterrence
Three Items in One
Deterrence as Concept, Research Program,
and Political Issue
jeffrey w. knopf 1
chapter two
Paul, T. V., Morgan, P. M., & Wirtz, J. J. (Eds.). (2009). Complex deterrence : Strategy in the global age. University of Chicago Press.
Created from gatech on 2023-06-01 01:44:29. Copyright © 2009. University of Chicago Press. All rights reserved.
3 2 jeffrey w. knopf
in today’s security environment. The chapter begins with a conceptual analysis because the basic question raised by both the September 11 attacks
and the Bush administration announcement of the preemption doctrine is
whether deterrence still works. The answer one gives to this question, however, depends on how one defi nes the concept of deterrence. The chapter
calls for a broader concept than specialists in security studies have traditionally employed. Developing a broader concept of deterrence might help
people think more creatively about alternative ways to practice deterrence
and hence enhance the chances for identifying effective deterrent strategies.
The conceptual analysis is followed by a historical discussion of the role
of deterrence as a tool of statecraft, a subject of policy debate, and the focus
of an academic research program. This review will show that reservations
about deterrence are not new. Changes in the status of deterrence derive
partly from changes in the international environment. Yet even when the
strategic incentives for using deterrence have been strong, the strategy has
faced much criticism in both scholarly research and actual policy debates.
Despite this, deterrence has typically remained an element of policy. This
history suggests it should not be hastily dismissed in light of current challenges. Politically, deterrence tends to refl ect a compromise around people’s
second choices. When support grows for either more soft- line or hard- line
policy alternatives, those who are skeptical about those alternatives tend
to rally behind deterrence. This tendency to evaluate deterrence relative to
alternatives shows the continuing relevance of the normative model of rational policy analysis. This chapter closes with some suggestions for how
social science research could assist rational policy analysis with respect to
deterrence.
a s s e s s i n g t h e r o l e o f d e t e r r e n c e
in contemporary security policy
There are three important reasons to assess the role that deterrence can play
against contemporary threats. First, if a preventive war doctrine leads U.S.
leaders to dismiss deterrence more completely than they need to, this could
lead the United States into unnecessary wars. If the United States attacks or
invades a country that could have been contained and deterred, the United
States will pay potentially high and avoidable costs in blood, treasure, and
diplomatic friction. The better a state’s ability to recognize when deterrence
is likely to work, the better its chances of saving preventive action for only
those cases where it is most likely to be advisable.
Paul, T. V., Morgan, P. M., & Wirtz, J. J. (Eds.). (2009). Complex deterrence : Strategy in the global age. University of Chicago Press.
Created from gatech on 2023-06-01 01:44:29. Copyright © 2009. University of Chicago Press. All rights reserved.
three items in one 3 3
Second, even if one has grave doubts about deterrence and strongly supports preventive war, it is not possible to undertake preventive military action against all potential threats simultaneously. While some threats are being eliminated, others will have to be contained and deterred until they can
be dealt with. Hence, even supporters of preventive war should not dismiss
deterrence and should instead be interested in identifying where it has
the best chances of working in order to set priorities for more aggressive
action.
Third, because deterrence remains an element of policy, it is important to
consider how to make it work best. Efforts to identify new ways of achieving
deterrence, if they exist, would thus be valuable. Deterrence is not always
appropriate, and employing it in such situations can be counterproductive.
For example, when dealing with an actor that is motivated by insecurity,
deterrent threats might only heighten its sense of insecurity and provoke
it to escalate or attack in response.4
 Given current threats, however, there
are situations in which deterrence could be crucial, provided it can be made
reasonably effective in today’s complex international system.
t h e c o n c e p t o f d e t e r r e n c e :
reasons for a broad approach
It is possible to distinguish the concept of deterrence from the variety of
strategies for practicing deterrence.5
 Adopting a broader deterrence concept would have policy benefi ts. There are still security threats against
which deterrence might be necessary and less costly than preventive war,
provided deterrence can be made effective. There are considerable doubts,
however, about whether traditional deterrence will work against contemporary threats, especially those posed by nonstate actors. This makes it
worthwhile to consider whether there are new or different ways to practice deterrence. Broadening the concept of deterrence may help us imagine
new ways to practice deterrence that have better odds of success or lower
costs.
Broadening the concept of deterrence is also intellectually defensible for
three reasons. First, deterrence already has been long employed in a much
wider range of circumstances than is generally recognized in the international relations (IR) literature. Second, a broader defi nition is compatible
with certain uses of the term in ordinary language. Third, recent developments in U.S. strategy are already moving toward a broader conception of
deterrence.
Paul, T. V., Morgan, P. M., & Wirtz, J. J. (Eds.). (2009). Complex deterrence : Strategy in the global age. University of Chicago Press.
Created from gatech on 2023-06-01 01:44:29. Copyright © 2009. University of Chicago Press. All rights reserved.
3 4 jeffrey w. knopf
The Diversity of Deterrence Applications
The fi rst reason to embrace a broad understanding of deterrence is that this
refl ects reality. Deterrence has been employed since long before the cold war
and in situations far beyond world politics. As an element of statecraft, deterrence has been around at least since the Roman general Vegetius declared,
“If you want peace, prepare for war.” Moreover, while IR scholars think of
deterrence in the context of trying to prevent military attacks, this is not the
only context in which it is utilized. Deterrence is also important in criminology, where law enforcement measures are evaluated in part in terms of their
ability to deter crime. Lawrence Freedman, as well as Robert Jervis in his
chapter for this volume, both point out that attempts to deter even extend
beyond the human race to other species. Freedman cites various insects that
use deceptive markings and other techniques to persuade potential predators to keep their distance.6
Because terrorism occupies a gray zone between crime and interstate war,
ideas about deterrence that have been developed in other contexts might be
helpful in dealing with current asymmetric threats, and we should not limit
our thinking about deterrence to the stock of ideas developed in strategic
studies. Given the variety of contexts in which deterrence has arisen over
time, it would be appropriate to have a concept of deterrence broad enough
to capture the different ways in which deterrence has been employed.
Ordinary- Language Analysis
A second reason for thinking broadly comes from stepping outside IR research to consider ordinary language. There is some irony here because, in
contrast to many terms used by IR scholars, we might expect the meaning
of deterrence to be widely understood. Ask the average person on the street
what an “epistemic community” is and odds are he or she will look at you
blankly if not hasten to get away. Yet nearly every layperson could offer a
defi nition of deterrence, and their defi nitions would likely all be about the
same: threatening to do something that will make the costs of an action
outweigh the benefi ts so as to convince others not to do it.
Our very familiarity with the word “deterrence” threatens to unduly narrow our understanding of it. To see this, consider that the same root can be
expressed as a noun or a verb. The terms “deterrence” and “deterrent” are
usually nouns, or sometimes adjectives (for example, a deterrence strategy).
The concept, however, also comes in a verb form: “to deter.” Logically, these
Paul, T. V., Morgan, P. M., & Wirtz, J. J. (Eds.). (2009). Complex deterrence : Strategy in the global age. University of Chicago Press.
Created from gatech on 2023-06-01 01:44:29. Copyright © 2009. University of Chicago Press. All rights reserved.
three items in one 3 5
should all have congruent meanings. Utilizing the passive voice, imagine an
actor who is deterred. We could inquire about what caused this actor to be
deterred. Anything we then identify that actually served to deter an actor
might be something that could be utilized deliberately as a form of deterrence. The usages that exist in ordinary language make it clear that the category of things that can be described as “a deterrent” should be equivalent
to the list of things that can act “to deter.” If the policy goal is to be able to
deter, it is worth thinking broadly about the types of measures that might
produce this effect rather than limiting ourselves to a single, narrow defi nition of deterrence.
This cuts against the grain of much theoretical writing on deterrence. As
with any concept that becomes important in academic study, there can be
debate over whether or not to restrict usage to a narrow defi nition. In strategic studies, the preference is usually to maintain a narrow defi nition. The
most thorough and careful discussion of the concept of deterrence remains
the work of Patrick Morgan. Morgan argues deterrence should be defi ned as
“the threat of military retaliation to forestall a military attack.” If we include
other means, we risk confl ating deterrence with other types of preventive
measures, while if we include other ends we may make deterrence equivalent to foreign policy as a whole.7
This narrow defi nition made some sense in the context of cold war debates. During the cold war, deterrence came to be associated with the effort to prevent nuclear strikes by threatening massive nuclear retaliation.
In effect, the connotations associated with massive retaliation and the subsequent situation of mutual assured destruction (MAD) displaced all other
denotations of the word “deterrence.” To limit the defi nition to this usage,
however, is to reduce the concept of deterrence to just one form of deterrent
strategy. Morgan is right that not every effort at prevention should be considered deterrence. For example, there are efforts underway to delegitimize
terrorism so that many who might support it today become convinced that
it is morally wrong in any circumstance; these are a form of suasion not
deterrence. Nevertheless, there are other steps that are being taken or that
could be taken whose aim is to deter, even though they do not rely on threatening massive punishment in retaliation for a military attack. For instance,
efforts to harden potential terrorist targets are intended in part to increase
the chances that a terror operation will fail if it is attempted; such efforts
also are intended to convince terrorists that such a prospective operation
actually will fail, in the hope that the prospect of failure might deter them
from launching an operation it in the fi rst place.
Paul, T. V., Morgan, P. M., & Wirtz, J. J. (Eds.). (2009). Complex deterrence : Strategy in the global age. University of Chicago Press.
Created from gatech on 2023-06-01 01:44:29. Copyright © 2009. University of Chicago Press. All rights reserved.
3 6 jeffrey w. knopf
There is a tension here between the logic of academic social science and
the logic of policy. In social science, scholars are admonished to select on
the independent and not the dependent variable, to defi ne terms precisely,
and to beware of conceptual stretching. All of this aids in the tasks of hypothesis testing and generalization. If deterrence is defi ned narrowly as using the threat of military retaliation to prevent military attack, it is possible
to identify like cases for comparison or large- N data analysis. From these
sorts of studies, we can learn a great deal about military threats, the overall
likelihood they will work, other variables correlated with their success or
failure, and the features of military threats that are likely to make them
more effective.
Such knowledge is policy relevant but does not provide a complete policy
analysis. The threat of military retaliation is just one option that policy makers can select, and it has to be compared against other options. Some of
these other options also might have the potential to deter an unwanted action; in some cases, they might work better than threats of highly punishing
retaliation. If there are other ways to deter, they should also be considered
deterrent options. In a full policy analysis, the various deterrent options
would be evaluated against nondeterrent options. If the goal is to deter
some unwanted action, then any measure that might contribute to achieving the goal should be considered a possible form of deterrence. Studying
the effects of military threats is useful, but it is not equivalent to studying
deterrence.
In addressing today’s complex- deterrence situations, policy concerns
make it advisable to embrace a broader defi nition of deterrence than normal
social science would recommend. If there are alternatives to the use of traditional military threats that are morally acceptable and that could help deter
terrorism or the use of weapons of mass destruction (WMD), it is important
to identify them. Traditional defi nitions of deterrence facilitate the social
science objective of cumulating knowledge within an existing research program. In the policy realm, however, embracing a narrow concept could limit
our ability to imagine alternative approaches and unnecessarily restrict the
range of options we analyze. If there is a nontraditional approach that would
be an effective deterrent, it could provide security while making it possible
to avoid preventive war. This makes it imperative not to reduce the concept
of deterrence to a single, narrow strategy. New, nontraditional approaches
would not replace traditional deterrence—threats of military retaliation are
probably still an effective way to deter rogue states from launching WMD
attacks. For some other activities, however, threats of military retaliation
Paul, T. V., Morgan, P. M., & Wirtz, J. J. (Eds.). (2009). Complex deterrence : Strategy in the global age. University of Chicago Press.
Created from gatech on 2023-06-01 01:44:29. Copyright © 2009. University of Chicago Press. All rights reserved.
three items in one 3 7
might not be credible, and it would help to have a broad framework that
might assist in identifying other deterrence options.
Deterrence Defi ned
The suggestion to adopt a broader notion of deterrence has a parallel in
recent debates over narrow versus broad defi nitions of security. Here as
well it has proven useful to separate the underlying concept from its varied
applications. David Baldwin has shown that there is a core concept of security that is recognizable in different applications of the concept but is still
delimited in a way that distinguishes security from other values that might
serve as policy goals.8
 This means that adjectives become important as a way
to distinguish different forms of security. National security, international
security, and human security all involve a concept of security, but the adjectives specify different referent objects (the state, the system, and individuals,
respectively) and imply different threats (military attacks by external actors,
instability, and actions that harm people within a state, respectively). This
suggests that scholars should start with an abstract, generic concept of deterrence and then use adjectives or other modifi ers to indicate how deterrence
will be applied in a particular context.
With this approach, it is still possible to talk about and examine deterrence in the way scholars in security studies think about it, without confl ating it with other possible approaches to deterrence. One could label it “traditional deterrence” or “classical deterrence” in those situations in which the
addition of an adjective would help clarify the type of deterrence to which
one is referring.
Conceptually, deterrence is a form of preventive infl uence that rests primarily
on negative incentives. When used as a conscious strategy, deterrence aims
to prevent an action that another party might undertake. This distinguishes
deterrence from the alternative coercive strategy of compellence, which
aims to compel the target to take a new action or to stop or undo an action already underway. (However, it is not always easy in practice to tell
whether the goal is deterrence or compellence, and policy may involve both
simultaneously.)
Deterrence is a form of infl uence because it operates by affecting an actor’s decision making. The way it works is more psychological than physical. In a classic discussion, Thomas Schelling distinguished between brute
force and coercion; Lawrence Freedman has updated this description with
a distinction between control strategies and coercive strategies.9
 Control
Paul, T. V., Morgan, P. M., & Wirtz, J. J. (Eds.). (2009). Complex deterrence : Strategy in the global age. University of Chicago Press.
Created from gatech on 2023-06-01 01:44:29. Copyright © 2009. University of Chicago Press. All rights reserved.
3 8 jeffrey w. knopf
strategies seek to take away any choice for the other side by eliminating its
ability to act or establishing physical domination. Deterrence, in contrast,
leaves the other side with the ability to make a choice but conveys certain
threats as a way to infl uence that choice. This distinguishes deterrence from
some other forms of prevention. For example, military preemption is a control strategy that aims to take away the other side’s ability to launch an
attack. A pure defense posture also does not aim to infl uence the other’s
decision; it accepts that an attack may occur and aims only to ensure the
attack will not succeed.
Lastly, deterrence emphasizes negative inducements. Preventive infl uence might be pursued through the promise of rewards or offer of reassurances, but these represent positive inducements. Deterrence, in contrast,
arises mainly because an actor expects a course of action to lead to a negative
outcome. Deterrence success often requires pairing a threat with certain
positive messages or inducements, so deterrence strategy usually does not
rest exclusively on negative incentives, but the essence of deterrence is the
target’s anticipation that taking a certain action will lead to a negative result.
Since Glenn Snyder’s seminal work, most specialists have recognized at least
two distinct paths to deterrence: punishment and denial.10 The threat to impose costs in retaliation for a transgression, which is deterrence by punishment, obviously involves a negative incentive. But deterrence by denial also
rests upon a form of negative incentive. The ability to resist and ultimately
frustrate another actor’s efforts can deny it any benefi ts while still leaving it
with the costs of its efforts, again leading to a net negative outcome for the
other side. An expectation of such a negative result is the key mechanism
involved in deterrence.
The relevant negative incentives must involve the potential aggressor’s
own interests, values, or objectives. Concern about the well- being of the defender is usually not part of the deterrence equation. Hence, if a person says
to a friend or loved one, “If you do this, you will hurt my feelings,” it might
persuade the other person not to act, but we would not normally describe the
friend or loved one as having been deterred. Deterrence involves infl uencing
calculations of self- interest (although the self in question can involve a collective identity, such as one’s family, community, nation, or the like); changing behavior by appealing solely to other- regarding concerns is a different
infl uence mechanism, separate from deterrence. In deterrence, it is fear of
negative consequences for themselves or their goals in response to their actions that persuades other people not to act.
Thus, deterrence involves anything that prevents (or attempts to prevent)
Paul, T. V., Morgan, P. M., & Wirtz, J. J. (Eds.). (2009). Complex deterrence : Strategy in the global age. University of Chicago Press.
Created from gatech on 2023-06-01 01:44:29. Copyright © 2009. University of Chicago Press. All rights reserved.
three items in one 3 9
an actor from taking an action by infl uencing its decision making through its
anticipation that the action will lead to a negative result for its own interests
or objectives. This generic concept or situation of deterrence can be distinguished from the strategy of deterrence. There might be situations in which
an actor is deterred without anyone having tried to send a deterrent message
or signal. Even where there is no conscious attempt to employ a strategy of
deterrence, a condition of deterrence can still result. Actor B might decide for
itself that a path of aggression is likely to end badly, and actor A might never
have the slightest inkling that actor B ever contemplated hostile action. Deterrence arises when a possible course of action is prevented because the
anticipation of negative consequences infl uences an actor’s decision making,
even if no other actor took steps meant to bring about such a result. In any
situation in which an actor was deterred (the verb form), it should logically
be valid to say there was deterrence (the noun form).
Some existing distinctions in the literature involve a similar differentiation between active efforts at deterrence and deterrence as more of a
background condition. Morgan’s infl uential notion of “general deterrence”
and Freedman’s more recently coined term “internalized deterrence” both
point to situations in which deterrence is maintained without much explicit
issuing of deterrent threats.11 Although deterrence might be unintended on
the defender’s part, the questions of interest for this chapter mainly concern
consciously chosen, deliberate efforts to deter. Where the intention to deter
exists, we have a strategy of deterrence.
Broadening Impulses in U.S. Strategy
The preceding discussion of deterrence as a concept says little about either
the means used or the ends sought—it does not require that either be military in nature. Recent U.S. military doctrine has utilized an “ends, ways, and
means” framework that can be helpful here. In fact, this framework has
already been applied to deterrence in a guidance document produced by
the U.S. Strategic Command, the “Deterrence Operations Joint Operating
Concept” (DO- JOC).12
As a generic concept, deterrence implies that the end sought is to prevent
something, but it is open as to what that something might be. It could be to
prevent an armed attack, but it could also be to avert states from giving assistance to terrorists or helping other states acquire WMD, two further objectives that are clearly relevant to national security. Beyond being preventive,
however, the ends sought can be wide- ranging; hence, deterrence is most
Paul, T. V., Morgan, P. M., & Wirtz, J. J. (Eds.). (2009). Complex deterrence : Strategy in the global age. University of Chicago Press.
Created from gatech on 2023-06-01 01:44:29. Copyright © 2009. University of Chicago Press. All rights reserved.
4 0 jeffrey w. knopf
distinctly associated with the “ways” part of the “ends, ways, and means”
formulation. It is a way of preventing an unwanted action by creating the
ability to respond or threatening to respond in a manner that will likely produce negative results if some other actor takes a specifi ed action. From this
perspective, punishment and denial can be considered to be two different
ways of practicing deterrence.13 There are other ways of trying to prevent
something (such as moral suasion or pure defense), and there are other ends
that can be sought besides prevention (such as compelling an action or eliciting cooperation), so this formulation still bounds the concept of deterrence
without tying it specifi cally to the cold war understanding of the term. One
also can utilize different means in seeking deterrence. Strategic deterrence
has historically involved military means, but there is no logical reason why
economic or informational or law enforcement measures cannot be used to
achieve deterrent effects.
In fact, U.S. doctrine already seeks to use a variety of instruments to produce deterrent effects. The DO- JOC, for example, states that sometimes nonmilitary means will be needed to achieve deterrence.14 Efforts to improve
consequence management in the event of an attack involving chemical,
biological, or nuclear weapons, for instance, could bolster deterrence. U.S.
strategy documents since September 11, 2001, have regularly listed improving the ability to minimize the effects of WMD as a part of efforts to deter
the use of these weapons.15 This provides a third argument for adopting a
broad concept of deterrence: the fact that U.S. policy has already moved,
albeit hesitantly and incompletely, to contemplate deterrent efforts that are
not based on the threat of military retaliation. Because real- world security
strategies are already moving in the direction of alternative approaches to
deterrence, it makes no sense for scholars who study security to limit themselves to a defi nition that is narrower than the actual policies that they are
supposed to be studying.
Although nonmilitary means could produce deterrent effects, there is
still something distinctive about the threat or use of military force.16 Threats
of force will in most cases have a greater, more disturbing psychological
impact than the use of nonlethal means, and if the threat is implemented
this will usually result in greater destruction and more far- reaching political consequences. Hence, it is important not to group together military
and nonmilitary approaches to deterrence in a way that would elide any
distinction between them. Where relevant, appropriate adjectives or other
descriptors should be used to clarify the means being considered. Hence,
deterrence as conventionally understood in IR could be labeled “military dePaul, T. V., Morgan, P. M., & Wirtz, J. J. (Eds.). (2009). Complex deterrence : Strategy in the global age. University of Chicago Press.
Created from gatech on 2023-06-01 01:44:29. Copyright © 2009. University of Chicago Press. All rights reserved.
three items in one 4 1
terrence.” Other approaches to deterrence could be labeled “nonmilitary” or
else described more specifi cally, using phrases such as “deterrence through
improved physical protection” or “deterrence by threat of sanctions.” The
distinctiveness of strategies that involve the threat or use of force actually
points to a possible advantage of adopting a broad concept of deterrence.
Because this approach encourages the use of adjectives to clarify the type of
deterrence in question, it might make use of the term “military deterrence”
more common in situations in which people would usually employ the word
“deterrence” on its own. This would highlight the fact that a threat of force is
involved and make it more explicit when military means, with their distinctive implications, are being used as the basis of deterrence.
As a concept, deterrence can involve anything that infl uences an actor not
to do something based on the actor’s expectation it will get a negative result
(or any attempt to exert such infl uence). To turn deterrence from an abstract
concept to a specifi c strategy or tactic, one has to become more specifi c about
the ends, ways, and means. What ends does one seek to prevent, what means
will be employed to do so, and in what way or ways will one seek to infl uence decision making?
For most of the twentieth century, deterrence as an element of national
security strategies was military in both ends and means: it used military
means to seek the end of preventing military attacks by states. Historically,
the ability to defend made possible a degree of deterrence by denial. With the
advent of nuclear weapons and long- range missiles, however, states could
not fi nd a way to guarantee effective defenses, so the “ways” part of the
equation shifted to deterrence by punishment. When a state cannot count on
stopping a nuclear- armed missile from reaching its target, it tries to prevent
such missiles from ever being launched by threatening retaliation in kind,
creating the nuclear deterrence strategy that dominated the cold war.
Nothing, however, inherently limits deterrence to retaliation in kind. The
end of the cold war and the rise of the terrorist threat have led to a deemphasis on this one form of deterrence but not to the death of the concept.
Instead, deterrence has been in transition, as the ends, ways, and means
have all been in fl ux. Indeed, the list of potential national security ends for
deterrence has been expanding. In addition to preventing military attacks
launched by states, the United States and many other international actors are
now concerned about preventing terrorist attacks mounted by nonstate actors. They also are concerned about preventing both states and private actors
from assisting terror networks. And they want to prevent rogue states and
terrorist organizations from acquiring or transferring WMD not just from
Paul, T. V., Morgan, P. M., & Wirtz, J. J. (Eds.). (2009). Complex deterrence : Strategy in the global age. University of Chicago Press.
Created from gatech on 2023-06-01 01:44:29. Copyright © 2009. University of Chicago Press. All rights reserved.
4 2 jeffrey w. knopf
using them. Far from being obsolete, deterrence is potentially being asked
to do more than it has ever done. This makes it all the more important to
understand why there is so much skepticism about deterrence. One major
reason is the psychological impact of the September 11, 2001, terror attacks,
which called into question the effi cacy of relying on deterrence.17 Placing
recent debates in a broader historical context, however, will show that there
have often been doubts about this strategy.
d e t e r r e n c e a s p o l i c y c h o i c e : l e ss o n s f ro m i t s
diplomatic, political, and intellectual histories
Some critics of the Bush administration expressed shock that the administration had, in their view, jettisoned decades of U.S. commitment to strategies
of containment and deterrence.18 There are good reasons to believe that the
administration was too skeptical about the prospects for deterring rogue
states and overstated the necessity for preemption.19 Many critics, however,
ignored the larger historical picture. There is no basis for expecting that
deterrence will remain forever ensconced as the lead element in a state’s
security strategy. Strategy, if rationally chosen, is a response to the international security environment. It makes sense that the importance of deterrence will vary as circumstances change; for purely strategic reasons, we
should not expect the role of deterrence to be a constant. Moreover, even in
periods during which deterrence is important strategically, such as during
the cold war, support for deterrence is often shaky. The U.S. commitment
to containment and deterrence has never been unwavering. Reservations
about deterrence have been expressed not just in the political arena but in
the scholarly arena as well. For all these reasons, the status of deterrence can
be both uncertain and variable. A particular deterrence strategy is unlikely
ever to be set in stone.
Conversely, the same factors that explain why deterrence does not usually go unchallenged as the lead element in national security strategy also
make it clear that deterrence is unlikely ever to go away completely. Deterrence is a choice that emerges out of a strategic, political, and intellectual
environment. Whether or not it is a good choice depends on what actors
want to achieve and what other options are available. Sometimes deterrence
will be the best alternative; sometimes it will not be the ideal way to deal
with emerging threats. Ex cathedra pronouncements either that we need to
hold fast to an existing strategy of deterrence or that deterrence no longer
applies and should be abandoned are worse than useless—they are harmful.
Paul, T. V., Morgan, P. M., & Wirtz, J. J. (Eds.). (2009). Complex deterrence : Strategy in the global age. University of Chicago Press.
Created from gatech on 2023-06-01 01:44:29. Copyright © 2009. University of Chicago Press. All rights reserved.
three items in one 4 3
It is more realistic to expect that states will sometimes fi nd deterrence an
appropriate choice and sometimes not.
Scholars typically treat deterrence as an independent variable. They inquire about whether or not a deterrence strategy is likely to work and the
conditions under which it is more or less effective. One can, however, also
make deterrence the dependent variable and ask when states will choose
to make deterrence a major component of national strategy. As with many
foreign policy choices, the commitment to deterrence can vary because of
strategic factors as emphasized by realists, domestic political factors as emphasized by second- image theorists, and ideational factors as emphasized by
constructivists and fi rst- image theorists. All three sets of factors have contributed, at various points in time, to discouraging a reliance on deterrence.
Variations in the Strategic Context
Strategic incentives to adopt deterrent strategies have never been entirely
absent, but they have varied in intensity over time. Historically, the centrality of deterrence in cold war strategy is an anomaly. Deterrence has rarely
been the overriding strategic goal for major powers. For most of history, the
leading powers were expansionist. They sought to expand their borders and
infl uence and to acquire empires. These goals required offensive strategies
and made deterrence a distinctly secondary concern, although fending off
others’ offensive attacks did create some concern with defensive strategies.
Thus, the classic nineteenth- century study of strategy by Clausewitz discusses both offense and defense—but not deterrence.20
This does not mean deterrence was irrelevant. The classic European
 balance- of- power system can be considered a mechanism of deterrence: to
the extent that alliance commitments remained fl exible, a potential aggressor would be prudent to consider whether expansionism on its part would
trigger a superior counterbalancing alliance. But European diplomats of this
period did not focus primarily on the potential deterrent effects of alliances.
They perceived the balance of power as a means to defend themselves and
contain potential hegemons, and there is little writing on strategy in this
period that delves into the inner workings of deterrence.
Eventually, popular attitudes began to shift from acceptance or even passionate embrace of imperialism to disapproval of war and aggression. At the
same time, some of the leading states became status quo powers. These shifts
made defense more important but still did not require states to think much
about deterrence per se. Strong, effective defenses would naturally exert a
Paul, T. V., Morgan, P. M., & Wirtz, J. J. (Eds.). (2009). Complex deterrence : Strategy in the global age. University of Chicago Press.
Created from gatech on 2023-06-01 01:44:29. Copyright © 2009. University of Chicago Press. All rights reserved.
4 4 jeffrey w. knopf
deterrent effect, refl ecting the logic of deterrence by denial, but deterrence
was a side benefi t of the commitment to defense, not a primary goal of strategy in its own right.
Hence, even though the concept of deterrence is ancient, explicit efforts
to employ deterrence strategies and develop theories of deterrence only became prominent during the twentieth century. This process began with the
advent of air power. Beliefs that “the bomber will always get through” gave
rise to a view that security might have to be based on deterrence.21 It was the
development of nuclear weapons, however, that spurred systematic theorizing about deterrence as a way to avoid nuclear war. Although the atom bomb
was suffi cient to trigger Bernard Brodie’s famous observation that henceforward the goal of military forces would no longer be to win wars but to avert
them, it took the subsequent development of the hydrogen bomb and the
long- range ballistic missile to move deterrence fully to center stage.22 In a
situation in which there were no effective defenses against ballistic missiles
and good reasons to doubt that either disarmament or a fi rst- strike knockout
blow would be successful, most leaders came to the conclusion that deterrence was the only feasible strategic option. The unimaginable destructive
power of the H- bomb made the recourse to deterrence not just desirable but
imperative.
If strategic considerations promoted a lead role for deterrence during
the cold war, it is natural that the end of that confrontation might cause
deterrence to be downgraded in U.S. national security strategy. The implications of strategic considerations in the post–cold war world, however, are
not necessarily so clear- cut. The proliferation of chemical, biological, and
nuclear weapons to so- called rogue states and the September 11 terrorist
attacks have created new security challenges. Given new threats to security, one might predict that the role of deterrence would be restored. To the
contrary, however, there has been no unambiguous return of deterrence to
center stage. Many question whether deterrence can be effective against the
new threats, especially religiously inspired suicide terrorism. Because the
relevance of deterrence as a response to contemporary security threats has
become the subject of considerable scholarly and public debate, probably
the most accurate conclusion is that strategic considerations have become
indeterminate when it comes to predicting the importance of deterrence in
national defense policy.
The shift from a bipolar to a unipolar system adds further ambiguity.23
As the world’s only remaining superpower, the United States has sought
to maintain its freedom of action. Accordingly, the United States has not
Paul, T. V., Morgan, P. M., & Wirtz, J. J. (Eds.). (2009). Complex deterrence : Strategy in the global age. University of Chicago Press.
Created from gatech on 2023-06-01 01:44:29. Copyright © 2009. University of Chicago Press. All rights reserved.
three items in one 4 5
wanted smaller states to acquire the ability to deter U.S. action. This creates a
systemic incentive to downplay the relevance of deterrence in the current international system, although in practice the United States has given indications that it can be deterred by regional states that acquire nuclear weapons
or the ability to direct the activities of terrorist organizations.
Two conclusions follow from the analysis in this section. First, the role of
deterrence is historically contingent because strategic incentives in the international system can vary. The range of contingency, however, is bounded.
On the one hand, use of deterrence in international relations is unlikely
to disappear altogether as long as states remain important actors and the
system stays anarchic. There will always be potential security threats for
which deterrence might be an appropriate response. On the other hand,
deterrence is unlikely ever to be embraced wholeheartedly and unreservedly
as the only element of national security strategy. As an infl uence strategy
and not a control strategy, deterrence leaves the fi nal strategic choice up
to the other side—even in the face of what should be a credible deterrent
threat, it can still choose to attack and deterrence can therefore fail. It is always uncomfortable to live with a risk of deterrence failure, and there will
always be a temptation to seek to eliminate the risk. For states with suffi cient
power, desire to assert control and not merely infl uence can lead them to
attempt preemption or even preventive war.
This leads to this section’s second conclusion: one cannot predict purely
from an analysis of the current security environment whether or not the
United States or other major powers will make deterrence a major goal of
their strategies. There are systemic pressures to continue to employ deterrence, but there are also contrary pressures to dismiss the relevance of deterrence and to embrace more controlling strategies. The net result of strategic
incentives in the complex post–September 11 international system is hence
ambiguous. As a consequence, the status of deterrence is also being determined by other factors, including political and ideational factors. Consideration of the political and intellectual history of deterrence will show that
conditions already existed that would have inclined many Americans to be
skeptical about deterrence even before September 11.
Policy Debates about Deterrence
Doubts about deterrence long predate the September 11 attacks. Indeed,
before the nineteen hijackers carried out their deadly mission, faith in deterrence had been considerably weakened by criticisms that arose in both
Paul, T. V., Morgan, P. M., & Wirtz, J. J. (Eds.). (2009). Complex deterrence : Strategy in the global age. University of Chicago Press.
Created from gatech on 2023-06-01 01:44:29. Copyright © 2009. University of Chicago Press. All rights reserved.
4 6 jeffrey w. knopf
public policy debates and academic research. Because of the legacy of past
debates, many Americans would already have been inclined to seek alternatives to deterrence when the shock of September 11 gave them extra motivation to do so.
Resistance to a reliance on deterrence was present in the political arena
from the start of the cold war. Deterrence became prominent in part because
of its importance in avoiding nuclear war, but it also received a boost because it fi t well with the larger U.S. grand strategy of containment. If the U.S.
political goal was to contain Soviet expansion, it made sense for the military
strategy to emphasize deterrence of possible Soviet military aggression—not
only at the nuclear but also at the conventional level. Yet, from the beginning,
deterrence and containment had critics on both the left and the right. Those
on the political right saw containment as a sell- out and argued for a strategy
of rollback to “liberate the captive nations” in Eastern Europe. The most
hawkish military strategists also urged preventive strikes against the Soviet
Union before it could achieve its own nuclear strike capability.24 Those on
the left, meanwhile, called for being more accommodating of Soviet concerns in an effort to preserve the World War II alliance. They also favored
nuclear disarmament over deterrence as the way to avoid nuclear war.
These basic splits reemerged periodically throughout the cold war. Social
protests in the late 1950s and early 1960s sought to ban nuclear testing or
even “ban the bomb.” Even more massive protests against the nuclear arms
race emerged in the late 1970s and early 1980s, and some of the movement’s
rhetoric criticized the expectation that nuclear deterrence would work indefinitely. The origins of the acronym MAD (for “mutual assured destruction”)
also are instructive. The term was coined in the 1960s by Donald Brennan,
who meant it as a pejorative label for what he viewed as the crazy logic of
deterrence theory; like many conservatives, Brennan argued for building
missile defenses instead of relying on deterrence.25 This perspective found a
champion in President Ronald Reagan, who launched the Strategic Defense
Initiative based explicitly on the belief that the United States could not count
on deterrence to work—he called for replacing mutual assured destruction
with mutual assured survival.26 Despite their criticisms, however, neither
doves nor hawks could identify a convincing replacement for deterrence.
Deterrence thus continued to feature prominently in U.S. strategy as a sort
of centrist compromise, but it had few advocates who promoted it publicly
with enthusiasm.
After the end of the cold war and collapse of the Soviet Union, questioning
of U.S. reliance on deterrence only increased. The sharpest criticism came
Paul, T. V., Morgan, P. M., & Wirtz, J. J. (Eds.). (2009). Complex deterrence : Strategy in the global age. University of Chicago Press.
Created from gatech on 2023-06-01 01:44:29. Copyright © 2009. University of Chicago Press. All rights reserved.
three items in one 4 7
from missile defense advocates. Although the Soviet threat had disappeared,
new security concerns arose regarding countries that came to be known as
rogue states. Given the continuing proliferation of WMD and ballistic missiles to these states, supporters of building missile defenses emphasized the
potential undeterrability of rogue states, especially those led by fanatical
dictators like Saddam Hussein or Kim Jong Il. Such leaders, they claimed,
might be so crazy or risk acceptant, and so thoroughly insulated from reality,
that they might not be deterred by the U.S. ability to annihilate their countries through nuclear retaliation (or, it might be added, by U.S. conventional
superiority).27 The 1990s also witnessed renewed calls for nuclear disarmament, including some by prominent former political and military leaders.28
Their arguments for abolition generally included expressions of doubt that
deterrence could prevent the use of nuclear weapons over the long term.
Hence, the decade before the al- Qaeda attacks on New York and Washington
involved some of the most vigorous challenges yet to deterrence in the political arena, from both the left and the right; it is hard to think of any equally
energetic political advocacy for deterrence.
The Deterrence Research Program
Public debates in the political arena constituted one source of challenges
to reliance on deterrence. Scholarly writings gave rise to a second source
of doubt. What Jervis has labeled the fi rst two waves of deterrence theory,
which together ran from the end of World War II to the 1960s, drew on
methodological tools like game theory to develop what became the standard
model of deterrence.29 The initial waves of deterrence theorizing assumed
both the necessity and the feasibility of deterrence, but eventually criticisms
of deterrence arose in the academic community. A 1974 book by Alexander
George and Richard Smoke represented the major turning point, inaugurating what Jervis called the third wave of deterrence theorizing. George and
Smoke reviewed historical case studies of conventional deterrence failures
and argued that deterrence can fail for several reasons, including the fact
that states do not always act with the level of rationality assumed by existing
deterrence theory.30
Subsequent research by Jervis, Ned Lebow, Janice Stein, and Patrick Morgan, among others, followed in this vein. Collectively, they developed a potent
critique of what has come to be known as rational deterrence theory (RDT).
Lebow in particular stressed that deterrence can fail even when deterring
states do everything right in terms of establishing a credible deterrent: make
Paul, T. V., Morgan, P. M., & Wirtz, J. J. (Eds.). (2009). Complex deterrence : Strategy in the global age. University of Chicago Press.
Created from gatech on 2023-06-01 01:44:29. Copyright © 2009. University of Chicago Press. All rights reserved.
4 8 jeffrey w. knopf
a clear commitment (i.e., defi ne one’s “red lines”), communicate one’s commitment, have the capabilities to act effectively on the commitment, and
demonstrate the resolve to act. Researchers in the third wave claimed the
case study evidence showed that even meeting all four conditions is not
suffi cient to ensure success. In particular, if potential challengers are highly
motivated due to the fear that their international position is becoming more
unfavorable or due to domestic political considerations, a variety of psychological biases can cause them to dismiss what should be credible signals of
a deterrent commitment.31
The third wave is generally associated with the use of a comparative case
study methodology and an emphasis on psychological variables. In the evolution of the deterrence research program, however, there is another important change from the fi rst two waves to the third wave that has usually
been overlooked. Because the initial waves of deterrence research focused
on credibility, they had to emphasize actions taken by the deterrer to explain
deterrence success or failure. RDT in effect blamed the victim: if deterrence
failed, it would be because the defender did not take the necessary steps to
make its deterrent threat credible. Although not given much attention in
Jervis’s typology, the fi rst empirical evaluations of RDT used statistical methods. From its beginnings in the 1960s, the statistical literature has largely
emphasized structural variables, such as the military balance or, in the case
of extended deterrence, the extent of political and economic ties between
a protector and the state it seeks to protect.32 Here deterrence success or
failure is explained largely in terms of underlying factors that are not under
the short- term control of either the defender or the challenger. One further
innovation of the third wave is that it put the focus more squarely on the
deterree than did the previous research. Because deterrence is an infl uence
strategy, not a control strategy, the proximate cause of deterrence success or
failure is the decision of the challenger about whether or not to be deterred.
One merit of the third wave is that it drew attention to the wide range of
factors that could lead a challenger to initiate an action that the defender had
hoped to deter. In light of the limitations of deterrence they identifi ed, most
of the scholars in the third wave advocated making greater use of positive
incentives, strategies of reassurance, and diplomatic initiatives to address the
underlying sources of tensions. In U.S. policy debates, this tended to align
them with political liberals.
Some strategic thinkers on the conservative side, however, also largely
embraced the third- wave critique of RDT. Colin Gray and Keith Payne have
been especially important fi gures in the hawkish case against deterrence.33
Paul, T. V., Morgan, P. M., & Wirtz, J. J. (Eds.). (2009). Complex deterrence : Strategy in the global age. University of Chicago Press.
Created from gatech on 2023-06-01 01:44:29. Copyright © 2009. University of Chicago Press. All rights reserved.
three items in one 4 9
They have cited the same reasons as the third- wave theorists for why deterrence can fail even when RDT would predict success. In addition, however,
they have added a strong culturalist strand to the debate. Gray and Payne
have argued that other actors will perceive and evaluate deterrent threats
in terms of their own cultural values and frames of reference. Such cultural
differences can undermine deterrence, they argue, by making it hard for
the deterrer to know what values of the other side must be held at risk in
order to make deterrent threats effective.34 In cold war debates over nuclear
strategy in the 1970s and 1980s, Payne and Gray joined others, such as the
historian Richard Pipes, who argued that Soviet leaders might be suffi ciently
willing to sacrifi ce the lives of their people that they would not be deterred
by the threat of massive retaliation against the Soviet population.35 These
critics called for seeking nuclear war–fi ghting capabilities that could target
Soviet leaders directly and ensure Soviet defeat if a nuclear war occurred.
In principle, this was not so much a dismissal of deterrence per se as it was
an effort to shift strategy from deterrence by punishment to deterrence by
denial. In practice, however, the critiques by hawks added to the body of
literature that called into question U.S. reliance on deterrence.
In the academic literature, others have risen to defend RDT, making
two major responses to the critics. These defenses, however, have not fully
addressed the sources of unease about relying on deterrence in the policy
realm. First, champions of RDT have pointed out that much of the case study
literature on deterrence suffers from selection bias: it has looked only at
cases of deterrence failure but not deterrence successes.36 This is a problem
if one wants to estimate the likelihood that deterrence will work. Looking
only at deterrence failures makes it appear that deterrence often fails, but in
the full universe of cases for which deterrence is potentially relevant it could
instead be true statistically that deterrence works a high percentage of the
time. Against an argument that deterrence is usually ineffective, this would
be an important counterargument, but many deterrence critics do not make
such a sweeping claim. Instead, they emphasize simply that “deterrence can
fail,”37 even when states implement a deterrence strategy exactly as RDT prescribes. The historical cases they cite are suffi cient to show that one cannot
expect a 100 percent guarantee from deterrence.
The second main defense of RDT actually reinforces this concern. Supporters of rational- choice analysis argue that many cases of deterrence failure can actually be explained in rational terms.38 They claim that in many of
the cases cited in the case study literature the challenging state could rationally have believed that it could get around the deterrent threat and avoid
Paul, T. V., Morgan, P. M., & Wirtz, J. J. (Eds.). (2009). Complex deterrence : Strategy in the global age. University of Chicago Press.
Created from gatech on 2023-06-01 01:44:29. Copyright © 2009. University of Chicago Press. All rights reserved.
5 0 jeffrey w. knopf
retaliation. In other cases, states could rationally have believed the utility for
attacking would be higher than for not attacking, even factoring in the costs
of the defender’s retaliation, because of what the attacking state perceived
as the even greater costs of not acting. According to Frank Harvey, the four
conditions identifi ed in the theory for making deterrence credible should
only be considered necessary conditions, not suffi cient ones.39 Meeting the
conditions still improves the odds of success, Harvey claims, but because
they are not jointly suffi cient conditions, RDT predicts there will be some
deterrence failures even when all four conditions are met.
In essence, defenders of RDT say that failures of deterrence as policy do
not automatically equate to failures of the theory. This is true, but it completely misses the point for those concerned about policy. For those seeking
to make or infl uence policy, what matters is whether deterrence will succeed
or fail. If deterrence does fail, it will be cold comfort to learn that the attack
one has just suffered can still be explained in rational terms. If what one
seeks from a deterrence strategy is certainty that it will work, the acknowledgment that a perfectly executed strategy can fail even against a rational actor means doubts will remain even if RDT proponents “win” their academic
debates over theory and method.40
the case for policy analysis
The preceding sections show that deterrence was already on shaky ground
when terrorists struck the World Trade Center and the Pentagon in 2001.
Deterrence had been questioned by political leaders and social activists for
half a century and by an important body of academic research for a quarter
century. Debates about the dangers of nuclear proliferation and renewed
calls for building ballistic missile defenses or seeking nuclear abolition kept
arguments about the limitations of deterrence simmering through the 1980s
and 1990s. By 2001, many people had already concluded that deterrence
could be unreliable.
The fact that the success of deterrence cannot be guaranteed in every situation had an impact in the policy realm. But should the absence of certainty
rule out the use of deterrence? In the run- up to the second Iraq war, the
Bush administration and its supporters implied the answer was yes. They
argued that the risk that deterrence and containment would fail required
the United States to undertake a preventive war against Saddam Hussein.
But the limitations of one option do not automatically make another option
preferable because none of the alternatives to deterrence offers an ironclad
Paul, T. V., Morgan, P. M., & Wirtz, J. J. (Eds.). (2009). Complex deterrence : Strategy in the global age. University of Chicago Press.
Created from gatech on 2023-06-01 01:44:29. Copyright © 2009. University of Chicago Press. All rights reserved.
three items in one 5 1
guarantee of success either.41 The possibility that deterrence might fail does
not necessarily mean it should be abandoned. In particular, the potential
limitations of a deterrence strategy do not by themselves make the case for
preventive war. The likely results of preventive war must also be evaluated in
their own right. As with deterrence, preventive war could fail, and the costs
and risks of even successful preventive war must be considered. Nor are
these the only two options; deterrence and preventive war must be evaluated
not only against each other but against other possible alternatives.
In short, traditional policy analysis remains necessary. Deterrence should
not be analyzed in isolation. The compelling logic of an abstract deterrence
model cannot by itself make the case for adopting a deterrence policy, while
the potential fl aws of deterrence revealed by empirical research do not by
themselves make the case for ruling out a deterrence strategy.
Because judgment rests on how one perceives deterrence relative to the
alternatives, people can sometimes appear to switch sides. Prior to the Iraq
war, the conservative columnist Charles Krauthammer highlighted what he
saw as an inconsistency in the views of many of the opponents of going to
war. He noted that many of those who argued that Saddam could be contained and deterred had been critics of the same strategies during the cold
war, and he excoriated “the hypocrisy of the antiwar movement’s current
newfound affection for deterrence.”42 If it is hypocrisy to support deterrence
in some situations but not in others, however, then the same charge could
be leveled at many hawks and conservatives. There are many who stressed
the role of U.S. nuclear weapons in deterring the Soviet Union who later
questioned the viability of deterring Saddam.
One of the most interesting examples of this volte- face is George Shultz.
In November 1983, the ABC Network broadcast a made- for- TV movie called
The Day After, which presented a grim depiction of the aftermath of a U.S.-
 Soviet nuclear war. After the movie, ABC granted airtime to then secretary
of state Shultz, speaking on behalf of the Reagan administration. Shultz
made the classic argument for deterrence, reassuring viewers that the United
States maintained nuclear weapons only to prevent their use by others.43 In
September 2002, however, the former secretary of state published an op-
 ed in the Washington Post stressing the urgency of preventive war in Iraq;
Shultz’s analysis of the threat posed by Saddam did not even mention deterrence.44 Making the portrait even more complex, in January 2007 Shultz
joined three other former high- ranking government offi cials to endorse “a
world free of nuclear weapons.”45
Perhaps these positions are all inconsistent, and Shultz is guilty of serial
Paul, T. V., Morgan, P. M., & Wirtz, J. J. (Eds.). (2009). Complex deterrence : Strategy in the global age. University of Chicago Press.
Created from gatech on 2023-06-01 01:44:29. Copyright © 2009. University of Chicago Press. All rights reserved.
5 2 jeffrey w. knopf
hypocrisy. More likely, however, Shultz adopted positions based on the specifi cs of each situation. After the cold war ended, Shultz could contemplate
the case for nuclear disarmament, even though he had perceived a continuing need for nuclear deterrence while the Soviet Union still existed. And
comparing Saddam Hussein to the Soviet leaders he had dealt with, Shultz
apparently decided the Iraqi leader was less susceptible to being deterred;
because Iraq was much weaker than the United States, it was also possible to
think that preemption would be feasible, while this was clearly not a viable
option against the Soviet Union. These different policy positions were not
necessarily all correct. But the Shultz case does provide an example of why
we should not expect the status of deterrence to remain constant. Strategic
circumstances can change, making deterrence less (or more) relevant than
before. The actors and actions one seeks to deter can also be different, with
deterrence success more likely in some situations than in others. Finally, the
feasible alternatives can vary. Sometimes, there will be a better alternative
to deterrence.
The fact that people can support deterrence in some situations but not
in others helps explain the politics of deterrence. When momentum starts
to build for strongly hard- line policies, such as preventive war, propeace
forces tend to align with moderates in support of deterrence as the preferable alternative. When doves gain momentum, as in the peak years of antinuclear weapons protest, hawks swallow some of their reservations about
deterrence and join centrists in defending it.46 As a result, in foreign policy
debates, the case for deterrence often echoes Churchill’s famous comment
about democracy: in some circumstances, deterrence is the worst strategy
there is, except for all the others.
Deterrence is not always the best option, even when it does emerge politically as a compromise around most people’s second choices. Nor does majority support for a different option, such as preemption, necessarily mean
deterrence was actually a worse choice. The fact that political debates tend to
be framed around competing alternatives, however, does suggest that democratic political systems are capable of engaging in a comparison of alternative policy options. Such political debate would be aided by a more explicit
commitment to the normative model of rational policy analysis. If political
offi cials, military leaders, and nongovernmental experts on strategy seek to
identify the full range of potential options and to evaluate carefully their
pros and cons, they are more likely to come to sound policy conclusions and
to be able to marshal stable public support for those policies. Deterrence
will not and should not always be the choice that emerges from this proPaul, T. V., Morgan, P. M., & Wirtz, J. J. (Eds.). (2009). Complex deterrence : Strategy in the global age. University of Chicago Press.
Created from gatech on 2023-06-01 01:44:29. Copyright © 2009. University of Chicago Press. All rights reserved.
three items in one 5 3
cess; sometimes, there are better options. Conversely, however, deterrence
is not going away; sometimes, it will be an appropriate strategy. Either way,
the status of deterrence will not be a constant. Even when the political and
intellectual climates are receptive to deterrence, the strategic environment
can vary in ways that induce shifts in the use of deterrence.
conclusion
The September 11 attacks seemed to sound a death knell for deterrence. In
response, many researchers sought to identify ways in which deterrence
could still prove viable. The history of deterrence, however, shows that recent doubts about the effi cacy of deterrence are hardly unique. In both the
political arena and academic research, deterrence has always had critics but
has still often emerged as a policy compromise around most people’s second
choices. Systemic factors point in the same direction. In a changing strategic environment, it was unlikely that deterrence would remain as central
as it was during the cold war. At the same time, the continued existence of
security threats made it unlikely deterrence would go away completely. The
complex nature of the contemporary security environment makes it desirable to broaden our understanding of deterrence to see if there are new
ways to achieve deterrence that might prove more effective than traditional
deterrent strategies.
Social science research can help inform policy debates concerning deterrence. Scholars, however, should try to avoid framing research or presenting
conclusions in a way that could have negative consequences if that work
enters the public arena. Blanket statements that “deterrence is the best strategy” or “deterrence does not work” should be avoided. In most situations
in which there is serious debate, deterrence has some probability of success
and some probability of failure. Whether or not deterrence is the best choice
will depend on what other options are available and on what alternative
deterrent options might be feasible.
In sum, this chapter reaches three primary conclusions. First, doubts
about deterrence after the September 11 terrorist attacks were not unique.
Just as past critiques did not lead to deterrence being abandoned before, they
are unlikely to do so now. Second, new, complex challenges call for creative
thinking about possible new approaches to deterrence. The broad concept
of deterrence proposed in this chapter, which removes any presumption that
deterrence must be military in either means or ends, is meant to help in the
identifi cation of new approaches to deterrence. Third, deterrence will not
Paul, T. V., Morgan, P. M., & Wirtz, J. J. (Eds.). (2009). Complex deterrence : Strategy in the global age. University of Chicago Press.
Created from gatech on 2023-06-01 01:44:29. Copyright © 2009. University of Chicago Press. All rights reserved.
5 4 jeffrey w. knopf
always be the best option; comparative analysis of policy options remains
as important as ever.
This means that some of the most important research on deterrence will
not be on deterrence at all. It will focus on potential alternatives to deterrence so as to improve the basis for comparing deterrence against other
options. Given recent U.S. policy debates, systematic research on preventive
war and preemption is particularly important.47 At the same time, however,
the debate on preventive war versus deterrence is remarkably narrow. There
might be a range of other alternatives that could contribute positively to
peace and security. The classic critique of deterrence theory by George and
Smoke concluded that deterrence has to be evaluated in the context of a
broader theory of infl uence that incorporates alternative strategies.48 I can
do no better than to make this my conclusion as well.
notes
1. I thank T. V. Paul, Pat Morgan, and Mark Brawley for helpful comments and suggestions on
an earlier draft of this essay.
2. Ivo H. Daalder and James M. Lindsay, America Unbound: The Bush Revolution in Foreign
Policy (Washington, DC: Brookings Institution Press, 2003), 125; Colin S. Gray, “Maintaining Effective Deterrence” (Strategic Studies Institute Monograph, U.S. Army War College, Carlisle, PA,
August 2003), 7.
3. Paul K. Davis and Brian Michael Jenkins, Deterrence and Infl uence in Counterterrorism:
A Component in the War on al Qaeda (Santa Monica: RAND, 2002); Ian R. Kenyon and John
Simpson, eds., “Deterrence and the Changing Security Environment,” Contemporary Security
Policy 25 (April 2004); Robert F. Trager and Dessislava P. Zagorcheva, “Deterring Terrorism: It
Can Be Done,” International Security 30 (Winter 2005 / 06): 87–123; Derek D. Smith, Deterring
America: Rogue States and the Proliferation of Weapons of Mass Destruction (Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 2006); David P. Auerswald, “Deterring Nonstate WMD Attacks,” Political Science
Quarterly 121 (Winter 2006 / 07): 543–68; James H. Lebovic, Deterring International Terrorism
and Rogue States: U.S. National Security Policy after 9 / 11 (London: Routledge, 2007).
4. Robert Jervis, Perception and Misperception in International Politics (Princeton: Princeton
University Press, 1976), chapter 3; Janice Gross Stein, “Deterrence and Reassurance,” in Behavior,
Society and Nuclear War, vol. 2, edited by Philip E. Tetlock et al. (New York: Oxford University
Press, 1991), 8–72.
5. Alexander L. George, “The Need for Infl uence Theory and Actor- Specifi c Behavioral Models of Adversaries,” Comparative Strategy 22 (December 2003), 480.
6. Lawrence Freedman, Deterrence (Cambridge, UK: Polity, 2004), 6; Jervis, this volume.
7. Patrick M. Morgan, “Deterrence in Foreign Policy,” Armed Forces & Society 3 (Spring 1977):
495–502; the quotation is from Morgan, Deterrence: A Conceptual Analysis, 2d ed. (Beverly Hills:
Sage, 1983), 29, emphasis in original.
8. David A. Baldwin, “The Concept of Security,” Review of International Studies 23 (January
1997): 5–26.
9. Thomas C. Schelling, Arms and Infl uence (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1966), 2;
Freedman, Deterrence, 26, 86.
Paul, T. V., Morgan, P. M., & Wirtz, J. J. (Eds.). (2009). Complex deterrence : Strategy in the global age. University of Chicago Press.
Created from gatech on 2023-06-01 01:44:29. Copyright © 2009. University of Chicago Press. All rights reserved.
three items in one 5 5
10. Glenn H. Snyder, “Deterrence by Denial and Punishment” (Research Monograph No. 1,
Center of International Studies, Princeton University, Princeton, 1959); Snyder, Deterrence and
Defense: Toward a Theory of National Security (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1961).
11. General deterrence exists when a potential challenger becomes convinced it is not worth
initiating any active challenge that would produce the type of crisis in which immediate deterrence becomes necessary; see Morgan, Deterrence: A Conceptual Analysis, and Morgan, Deterrence
Now (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2003), chapter 3. Internalized deterrence arises
when an actor internalizes certain norms such that it no longer believes it would be legitimate to
take certain actions; see Freedman, Deterrence.
12. United States Strategic Command, “Deterrence Operations Joint Operating Concept,” version 2.0, December 2006.
13. The “Deterrence Operations Joint Operating Concept” (DO- JOC) adds a third way of
seeking deterrence, which it labels “deterrence by inducing adversary restraint.” In this approach, one tries to raise the benefi ts and / or lower the costs for the other side of choosing not
to act. This third way refl ects a well- known point derived from expected utility analysis: even a
credible threat of retaliation can fail to deter if the other side perceives the costs of not acting
as even greater than those of acting. To describe efforts to make the status quo more palatable to the other side as a form of deterrence requires broadening the concept even further
than I have called for here. By my defi nition, encouraging restraint is not deterrence. What the
DO- JOC describes instead encompasses some other terms in the literature. Partly, it refl ects
Schelling’s famous insight about the need to incorporate assurances in a deterrence strategy—
but assurance is not a separate way to deter, it is a necessary component of the fi rst two ways.
If the strategy goes beyond assurance to try to assuage deeper fears about the future on the
other side (i.e., to lower its expected costs of continuing the status quo), it becomes a strategy
of reassurance. If it offers new benefi ts for restraint, it becomes a strategy of positive incentives. In practice, it is often a good idea to combine these with deterrence, but they are not best
understood as a form of deterrence. In short, while I advocate a broader concept of deterrence
than is typically found in the IR literature, I do also see limits on how far the term should be
broadened.
14. United States Strategic Command, “Deterrence Operations Joint Operating Concept,” 16, 28.
15. Consequence management (CM) is described as a deterrent measure as early as the famous
2002 National Security Strategy, which is often viewed as having dismissed deterrence in favor
of preemption (President of the United States, “The National Security Strategy of the United
States of America,” September 2002, 14). The second iteration of the National Strategy for Combating Terrorism released by the Bush administration explicitly lists deterring terrorist WMD use
as an objective, and also mentions CM as one measure that can contribute to that goal (United
States Government, “National Strategy for Combating Terrorism,” September 2006, 14).
16. I thank Pat Morgan for drawing my attention to the importance of this point.
17. For an analysis of how “lessons of 9 / 11” contributed to support for the Iraq war, see
Jeffrey W. Knopf, “Misapplied Lessons? 9 / 11 and the Iraq Debate,” Nonproliferation Review 9
(Fall / Winter 2002): 47–66.
18. Daalder and Lindsay, America Unbound, 125.
19. Jeffrey W. Knopf, “Deterrence or Preemption?” Current History (November 2006):
395–99.
20. Carl von Clausewitz, On War, translated by Michael Howard and Peter Paret (Princeton:
Princeton University Press, 1976).
21. George H. Quester, Deterrence before Hiroshima: The Airpower Background of Modern Strategy (New York: John Wiley & Sons, 1966). The statement “the bomber will always get through”
was made by British Prime Minister Stanley Baldwin before the House of Commons in 1932
(quoted in Quester, Deterrence before Hiroshima, 67). Interestingly, Baldwin lacked confi dence in
Paul, T. V., Morgan, P. M., & Wirtz, J. J. (Eds.). (2009). Complex deterrence : Strategy in the global age. University of Chicago Press.
Created from gatech on 2023-06-01 01:44:29. Copyright © 2009. University of Chicago Press. All rights reserved.
5 6 jeffrey w. knopf
the prospects for mutual deterrence and instead advocated an essentially preemptive strategy of
massive offensive operations against the other side at the outset of hostilities.
22. Bernard Brodie, “Implications for Military Policy,” in The Absolute Weapon: Atomic Power
and World Order, edited by Bernard Brodie (New York: Harcourt, Brace, 1946), 76.
23. I thank T. V. Paul for this observation.
24. Marc Trachtenberg, “A ‘Wasting Asset’: American Strategy and the Shifting Nuclear Balance, 1949–1954,” in Nuclear Diplomacy and Crisis Management, edited by Sean M. Lynn- Jones,
Steven E. Miller, and Stephen Van Evera (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1990), 69–113.
25. Robert Jervis, “Mutual Assured Destruction,” Foreign Policy no. 133 (November / December
2002): 40.
26. See Associated Press, “Reagan in Europe: Speech in Germany, Arrival in Spain,” New York
Times, May 7, 1985, A8.
27. See, for example, Jesse Helms, “Opening Statement of Senator Jesse Helms (R- NC),” Ballistic Missiles: Threat and Response, Hearings before the Committee on Foreign Relations, United
States Senate, April 15, 1999 (Washington, DC: Government Printing Offi ce, 2000), 2; Baker
Spring and James H. Anderson, “Making the Case for Missile Defense” (Backgrounder no. 1225,
Heritage Foundation, Washington, DC, October 5, 1998),http: // www.heritage.org / Research /
MissileDefense / BG1225.cfm.
28. See, for example, Canberra Commission on the Elimination of Nuclear Weapons, “Executive Summary,” August 1996, http: // www.nuclearfi les.org / menu / key- issues / nuclear-weapons /
 issues / civil- society / canberra- commission- executive- summary_1996–08–00.htm. Convened by
the Australian government, the Canberra Commission was an international group of experts that
included former high- level government and military leaders.
29. Robert Jervis, “Deterrence Theory Revisited,” World Politics 31 (January 1979): 289–324.
30. Alexander L. George and Richard Smoke, Deterrence in American Foreign Policy: Theory and
Practice (New York: Columbia University Press, 1974).
31. Richard Ned Lebow, Between Peace and War: The Nature of International Crisis (Baltimore:
Johns Hopkins University Press, 1981); Robert Jervis, Richard Ned Lebow, and Janice Gross Stein,
eds., Psychology and Deterrence (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1985); Stein, “Deterrence and Reassurance.”
32. For a good example, see Paul K. Huth and Bruce Russett, “What Makes Deterrence Work?
Cases from 1900 to 1980,” World Politics 36 (July 1984): 496–526.
33. Both authors have published extensively. For good recent summations of their thinking, see Keith B. Payne, The Fallacies of Cold War Deterrence and a New Direction (Lexington, KY:
University Press of Kentucky, 2001); and Colin S. Gray, “The Reformation of Deterrence: Moving
On,” Comparative Strategy 22 (December 2003): 429–61.
34. In addition to the writings of Payne and Gray, see also Adam Garfi nkle, “Culture and
Deterrence,” (E- Note, Foreign Policy Research Institute, Philadelphia, August 25, 2006),
http: // www.fpri.org / enotes / 20060825.americawar.garfi nkle.culturedeterrence.html.
35. Richard Pipes, “Why the Soviet Union Thinks It Could Fight and Win a Nuclear War,”
Commentary 64 (July 1977).
36. Christopher H. Achen and Duncan Snidal, “Rational Deterrence Theory and Comparative
Case Studies,” World Politics 41 (January 1989). James D. Fearon argues that selection effects also
affect the main large- N, quantitative tests of deterrence. James D. Fearon, “Selection Effects and
Deterrence,” International Interactions 28 (January–March 2002).
37. Keith B. Payne and Dale C. Walton, “Deterrence in the Post–Cold War World,” in Strategy
in the Contemporary World: An Introduction to Strategic Studies, edited by John Baylis et al. (New
York: Oxford University Press, 2002), 170ff.
38. Achen and Snidal, “Rational Deterrence Theory.” For an argument that most of Lebow’s
cases specifi cally involve failures to implement deterrence correctly rather than failures of RDT,
Paul, T. V., Morgan, P. M., & Wirtz, J. J. (Eds.). (2009). Complex deterrence : Strategy in the global age. University of Chicago Press.
Created from gatech on 2023-06-01 01:44:29. Copyright © 2009. University of Chicago Press. All rights reserved.
three items in one 5 7
see John Orme, “Deterrence Failures: A Second Look,” International Security 11 (Spring 1987):
96–124.
39. Frank P. Harvey, “Rigor Mortis, or Rigor, More Tests: Necessity, Suffi ciency, and Deterrence Logic,” International Studies Quarterly 42 (December 1998): 675–707. In part for reasons
argued above, I believe the four conditions are only probabilistic factors, not necessary ones.
There can be cases in which an actor is deterred even though no explicit deterrent threat was
issued. Communicating a deterrent message when a genuine threat exists is likely to improve the
odds of success, but it might not in all cases be necessary.
40. In addition to work on deterrence using rational- choice and case study methods, there
are many studies that use statistics. The statistical research generally fi nds modest support for
the propositions of RDT. Because the data sets contain cases of failure, however, the large- N
literature also indirectly confi rms that deterrence can either succeed or fail. There are factors
that increase the probability of success, but there are no infallible deterrent strategies. For a
good review, see Paul K. Huth, “Deterrence and International Confl ict: Empirical Findings and
Theoretical Debates,” Annual Review of Political Science 2 (1999): 25–48. Morgan, Deterrence Now,
chapter 4, reviews and compares the fi ndings from the formal modeling, statistical, and case
study research.
41. Even Colin Gray, who generally supports hard- line positions, acknowledges this point and
uses it to argue for not unduly dismissing deterrence. See his “Maintaining Effective Deterrence,”
vi, 9.
42. Charles Krauthammer, “The Obsolescence of Deterrence,” Weekly Standard, December 9,
2002, http: // www.theweeklystandard.com / Content / Public / Articles / 000 / 000 / 001 / 964dzkuf
.asp.
43. Jon Niccum, “Fallout from ‘The Day After,’” Lawrence.com, November 19, 2003,
http: // www.lawrence.com / news / 2003 / nov / 19 / fallout_from / .
44. George P. Shultz, “Act Now,” Washington Post, September 6, 2002, A25.
45. George P. Shultz et al., “A World Free of Nuclear Weapons,” Wall Street Journal, January 4,
2007, A15.
46. A partial exception is the early 1980s, when the Reagan administration responded to
the nuclear freeze movement by holding out the dream that nuclear weapons could be rendered
obsolete through its star wars proposal instead.
47. Some good recent analyses of these options include Dan Reiter, “Preventive War and Its
Alternatives: The Lessons of History” (Strategic Studies Institute Monograph, U.S. Army War College, Carlisle, PA, April 2006); and Karl P. Mueller et al., Striking First: Preemptive and Preventive
Attack in U.S. National Security Policy (Santa Monica, CA: RAND, 2006).
48. George and Smoke, Deterrence in American Foreign Policy.
Paul, T. V., Morgan, P. M., & Wirtz, J. J. (Eds.). (2009). Complex deterrence : Strategy in the global age. University of Chicago Press.
Created from gatech on 2023-06-01 01:44:29. Copyright © 2009. University of Chicago Press. All rights reserved.
