The Past and Future of Deterrence Theory
Sep 29, 2023

3
The Past and Future of Deterrence Theory
Patrick M. Morgan
Serious attention to deterrence first emerged in the United Kingdom as World
War II was approaching, and detailed study of it, particularly nuclear deterrence,
began immediately after the war, driven in particular by the onset of the Cold
War.1
Preoccupation with deterrence in theory and practice was soon intense and
continued until the end of the Cold War many years later. This event brought a
significant relaxation of tensions among the great powers, sharp cuts in their nuclear arsenals, and shrinking great power defense budgets and forces, plus similar
reductions in a number of other states. It also temporarily reduced attention to deterrence analytically and in practice.
A series of historical developments then revived attention to deterrence early in
the twenty-first century. First, rising tensions and conflict reappeared among the
great powers, alongside efforts by several other states seeking to become nuclear
powers (i.e., Iran, North Korea). Second, terrorism increased in several areas of the
world, along with continuing outbursts of conventional, asymmetrical, and various
forms of guerrilla or other insurgent warfare. Third, an epidemic of widespread
cyberattacks erupted, suggesting the prospect of future cyber warfare. Fourth, an
array of new weapons and weapon systems, drawing on or deriving from new military and other technologies, has steadily increased and spread.
The revived interest in the theory and practice of deterrence includes investigation of elements largely ignored, marginalized, or underdeveloped during the Cold
War. They include elements of deterrence by denial, deterrence by international
collective actors, the changing nature, conduct, and role of general deterrence (as
1 Actually, deterrence is older, but it really blossomed in theory and practice from the late 1930s
on. On this and its development after World War II, see: Patrick Morgan and George Quester, “How
History and the Geopolitical Context Shape Deterrence,” in Deterrence: Its Past and Future, edited by
George P. Shultz, Sidney D. Drell, and James E. Goodby (Stanford, CA: Hoover Institution Press,
2011), 1–45. The best introduction to deterrence, short yet highly instructive, is Lawrence Freedman,
Deterrence (Cambridge: Polity Press, 2004).
Patrick M. Morgan, The Past and Future of Deterrence Theory. In: Cross-Domain Deterrence: Strategy
in an Era of Complexity. Edited by Jon R. Lindsay and Erik Gartzke, Oxford University Press (2019).
© Oxford University Press. DOI: 10.1093/oso/9780190908645.003.0003
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/35252/chapter/299811708 by Georgia Institute of Technology user on 31 August 2023
Past and Future of Deterrence Theory 51
contrasted with immediate or crisis deterrence) in sustaining international security
and stability globally, and some erratic use of deterrence in interventions at the regional, state, and domestic levels by ad hoc groups of states seeking to sustain peace
and security.2
The current interest in deterrence is notably conscious of the frequent failure
of recent deterrence efforts to sustain security and stability in international politics. Efforts to deter, contain, and end conflict face frequent difficulty—whether
terrorism, intrastate ethnic, religious and political fighting, and interstate fighting.
There is increasing conflict and serious disarray in the East-West deterrence relationship again, with disturbing possibilities of outright conflict now being openly
discussed among analysts and observers.
On Deterrence
Deterrence is a fundamental strategy and method for escalation control, in both
international and intrastate conflict, intended by an actor to prevent an attack on
itself or others that it wants to protect.3
The general idea is hardly new, but the
specific term and its modern-day components began to emerge as World War II
approached, and it became a striking phenomenon after the use of atomic weapons
in 1945. Deterrence and its close relative, compellence, are components of coercive
diplomacy.4
Deterrence quickly developed into a strategy because it seemed crucial
for preventing another great war and any further use of nuclear weapons, making it
of vast importance in managing security in the international system and a recourse
for preventing wars between conflicting states. It became a key factor for shaping
peace and security, as a tactic as well as a strategy, and a central driver in developing
modern arms control. It could prevent ruinous wars, by eliminating the utility of
cheap-victory strategies that encouraged them, and could manage peace without
fighting by controlling threats by enemies to use unimaginably destructive weapons
against one another.
Deterrence thinking eventually embraced two broad types of deterrence
situations and two distinctive kinds of deterrence associated with them. One is
2 This refers to deterrence via international bodies like the UN Security Council or ad hoc groups
of states. See: Patrick Morgan, “Collective Actor Deterrence,” in Complex Deterrence: Strategy in the
Global Age, edited by T. V. Paul, Patrick Morgan, and James Wirtz (Chicago: University of Chicago
Press, 2009), 158–182. 3 Patrick Morgan, Deterrence Now (New York: Cambridge University Press, 2003), 105. 4 See, for example, Peter Viggo Jakobsen, “The Strategy of Coercive Diplomacy: Refining Existing
Theory to Post–Cold War Realities,” in Strategic Coercion, Concepts and Cases, edited by Lawrence
Freedman (New York: Oxford University Press, 1998), 61–85; Peter Viggo Jakobsen, “Coercive
Diplomacy: Countering War-Threatening Crises and Armed Conflicts,” in Contemporary Security
Studies, 4th ed., edited by Alan Collins (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2016), 280–293.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/35252/chapter/299811708 by Georgia Institute of Technology user on 31 August 2023
52 T h e C o n c e p t o f C r o s s – D o m a i n D e t e r r e n c e
general deterrence: a state, or group of states, maintains a continuing military posture and forces intended to scare off potential attacks.5
The other is immediate deterrence: a state is threatened with being attacked or otherwise seriously harmed
and puts some or all of its forces and government on much higher alert.6
General
deterrence can operate almost indefinitely, being periodically adjusted to changes in
the international system or a regional or local system. It can operate at a low level of
salience and readiness, and is often somewhat vague. It is used this way in balance
of power relationships and in stabilizing regional and global security management
efforts in international politics. When effective, general deterrence can even build
up considerable influence, lowering chances of serious conflict and war breaking
out, to enhance stability in international relations.
In sharp contrast, immediate deterrence involves an intense crisis with an outbreak of fighting looming or even some limited fighting already under way. With
such tension comes fear of irrationality or mistakes provoking death and destruction, which in turn incite strong emotions and last-minute efforts to dampen all
this. Such a situation usually lasts only briefly—it is too tense and dangerous to
sustain indefinitely—either abating or giving way to serious fighting. We have
some experience in practice but no reliable theory on how to effectively manage
an emerging shift from general to immediate deterrence, smoothly or safely and
durably, and then reorienting in the opposite direction. More theory has been developed on shifting deterrence to effectively create or sustain a pluralistic security
community, building a working collective security system, or developing a great
power concert.
Backed by great powers’ nuclear weapons and often their significant conventional
forces, deterrence appears to have prevented large great power wars throughout the
Cold War, helping to stabilize the core international system, but not without deep
concerns and strenuous objections at times. Lesser wars occurred nonetheless, some
dangerous enough to promote fears of escalation into nuclear war, and provoked or
reinforced fear that the world was on the edge of disaster or Armageddon. After all,
deterrence could be effective, but it was not certain to be perfect.
5 For example, the United States, in general deterrence, has long maintained forces in and around
Japan and the Republic of Korea for its own and selected others’ protection. General deterrence varies
greatly in intensity; in many places it is modest in presence and intensity, while for years the Republic
of Korea, Japan, and U.S. forces have been kept on fairly high alert because a North Korean attack
looks likely or at least quite possible, and the same is true for North Korea vis-à-vis the United States
and the Republic of Korea. This is nicely discussed in Terrence Roehrig, “Reinforcing Deterrence: The
U.S. Response to North Korean Provocations,” in Joint U.S.-Korean Academic Studies: Facing Reality in
East Asia: Tough Decisions on Competition and Cooperation, edited by Gilman Rozman (Washington,
DC: Korea Economic Institute of America, 2015), 221–238. 6 For example, North Korea’s missile and nuclear weapons tests in 2016–2018 led to U.S. and South
Korea forces being put on high alert, and vice versa.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/35252/chapter/299811708 by Georgia Institute of Technology user on 31 August 2023
Past and Future of Deterrence Theory 53
Thus the end of the Cold War and sharp decline in great power conflict brought
enormous relief and almost immediate steps back from that brink. However, enough
remaining reliance on deterrence, plus mistrust, made it impossible to totally discard
deterrence postures, including nuclear deterrence. And sure enough, great power
disagreements soon reappeared. Threats and indications of continued or resumed
reliance on nuclear weapons started reappearing, alongside escalating military
spending, modernized missiles and nuclear warheads, and more military posturing
at borders, at sea, or in the air. Meanwhile, numerous lower-level conflicts emerged
or continued, many quite vicious and destructive, with familiar results: surges in
numbers of refugees, vast social disruptions, terrific human rights burdens, worries
over possible loss of control of weapons of mass destruction somewhere, and threats
of complete disarray in places where various states and societies lost control of big
portions of their territories and citizens. New threats have included direct invasions
and fierce foreign-based terrorism by nonstate actors, with foreigners penetrating
societies to mount devastating individual or small-group attacks, as well as startling
domestic uprisings. The concept of deterrence was not designed for such eruptions,
a plurality of actor types, for so many potential attack situations, or for having so
many people facing grave situations as deterrence crumbled around them. Many
people now suffer much harm and destruction without conventional wars, and this
spreads fear about the potential for interstate—even nuclear—wars.
Attempts to deter effectively have therefore become more complex, difficult,
even unpredictable and unmanageable at times, thus bringing the reliability of the
very concept of deterrence for providing stability and security into question. This
is reinforced by some noticeable decay in cooperation among major states—both
allies and opponents—in conducting deterrence efforts. The United States is therefore immersed in problems in pursuing deterrence efforts in and with Europe, the
Middle East, Northeast Asia, South Asia, and parts of Africa, problems approached
from a largely global perspective, while numerous other states are practicing deterrence in their neighborhoods.
Conceptual Stretching in Deterrence
In part, some confusion arises because the concept of deterrence is being stretched to
cover a greater variety of situations. Initially focused primarily on the nuclear threat
and mounting a retaliatory nuclear threat to contain it, deterrence was later applied
to major and minor conventional attacks and wars, with an eye on possible escalation
to the nuclear level, as in the traditional deterrence problem; deterrence then increasingly also focused on protecting allies, improving or defending one’s position in the
international system, and providing assistance to strategically placed states, longtime
friends, and diaspora communities. Thus the concept of deterrence was expanded to
deal with even quite limited conflicts or to see that they end appropriately.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/35252/chapter/299811708 by Georgia Institute of Technology user on 31 August 2023
54 T h e C o n c e p t o f C r o s s – D o m a i n D e t e r r e n c e
There has been interest in applying deterrence concepts to low-level threats
with or among others, such as extensive low-level fighting, struggles with radical
elements in the Middle East, or ethnic and religious anger directed at the West
while also violently directed at neighbors. Outside parties respond, claiming they
have vital stakes to sustain. Such widespread, often only partially cohesive, attacks
or deterrence efforts often put lives and holdings at serious risk. It is especially difficult to target deterrence against cyberattacks and similar threats that seem almost
random or self-organized, sometimes only partially supported by governments and
including actively hostile religious groups, criminal elements, breakaway ethnic
groups, and so on.7
Terrorists can be very harmful, as demonstrated by the 9/11
attacks, Islamic State (Daesh) attacks, attacks by central African groups, and widespread violence that drives refugee flows. The dangers grow with the proliferation of
low-cost, high-impact weapons, and thus so does interest in deterrence.8
Shifts from general to immediate deterrence situations can spring up almost instantly, as with 9/11. Moreover, the range and scale of possible attacks have been
expanding. One implication is that to intervene to establish or repair deterrence
outside actors may have to reach inside a country and society, not just confront
its government, and do so by use of force, not just threats. There are more ways to
pursue deterrence by nonmilitary steps, i.e., by supporting the citizens against the
government, displacingor buying out anti-regime elements, and attacking the regime by sanctions, isolation, various disruptions, and so on.
A common Western practice now is deterrence by nonfatal or limited casualty
steps, such as advanced weapons for precision attacks from long distance, cutting off
flows of weapons to targeted actors, imposing financial and other sanctions via international organizations and agencies, incremental punishment (a common Israeli
military practice), gradually escalated retaliation in the hope that the target will
back down, and blending deterrence with arms control and other measures to stabilize a situation (like the 2015 deal on Iran’s nuclear weapons program).9
Too little attention is paid to how the application of deterrence is now being
stretched and bent by still other environmental aspects. For example, Vladimir Putin’s
efforts to restore Russia’s great power status are military rearmament steps for protection that also tap into Russia’s resentment over the West’s supposed isolation of
it. This justification enables Russia to make moves toward dominating its neighbors
again, and thereby bolster Putin’s domestic rule, via an expansionist, aggressive style
7 On deterring many of these sorts of opponents, see: James H. Lebovic, Deterring International
Terrorism and Rogue States: US National Security Policy after 9/11 (New York: Routledge, 2007). 8 An example, detailing the elaborate Islamic State arsenal at the time: “Taking Stock; The Arming
of Islamic State,” Amnesty International, December 2015, accessed 13 March 2018, https://www.
es.amnesty.org/uploads/media/Taking_Stock_The_arming_of_IS.pdf.pdf. 9 See: James M. Action, Edward Ifft, and John McLaughlin, “Arms Control and Deterrence,” in
Schultz et al., Deterrence, Its Past and Its Future, 279–324.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/35252/chapter/299811708 by Georgia Institute of Technology user on 31 August 2023
Past and Future of Deterrence Theory 55
of deterrence. He sees opportunities for Russia in coercive interactions from a nationalist deterrence posture and perspective. Such deterrence-related efforts are
hard on international interactions. The West perceives Russia as harsh and semiisolationist, adopting expansionist leanings that recall Cold War attitudes and necessitate a revitalization of Western deterrence postures. This is likely to contribute
to the further degradation of East-West relations.
China’s interaction with other major powers and neighbors similarly stems from
seeing the West as essentially expansionist, leading Beijing to a deterrence perspective that is deeply affected by cultural, historical, and fearful attitudes. Western
responses are depicted as continuing efforts to alter contemporary China’s regime,
national structure, society, and culture. This has evoked a very tough deterrence
posture, pushing outsiders’ responses toward similar steps: strengthening deterrence postures and deterrence-oriented military preparations and associations
around China, all of which reflect classic deterrence thinking applied to novel
circumstances.
Domestic environments also deeply affect Western deterrence efforts. The
aftereffects of the Great Recession of 2008, together with the unimpressive results
of Western interventions in the Middle East, Africa, and Afghanistan, have eroded
domestic support for foreign interventions to wage war in restive foreign societies
at great expense in blood and treasure. This reticence undercuts the American
and European image abroad and considerably reduces the credibility of deterrent
threats to intervene.
Of course, the international environment shapes deterrence as well—and is
also unevenly appreciated. Collective actor deterrence can be established by
ad hoc collections of states on behalf of global or major regional groups’ collective values for human rights, human welfare, peace and security, and so on.
It can involve numerous kinds of deterrence efforts. The Security Council was
supposed to supply a significant degree of deterrence, enough to manage international security. It has never reached its intended level of cooperation and
success.
Deterrence today often involves threats of punishment that go beyond retaliation to encompass invasion or some other penetration with more than retaliation
in mind. This way of curbing harmful behavior involves steps almost unheard of in
classic deterrence thinking. It involves extended fighting at times and even more
management and development and can run on for years. This is only partly deterrence because the focus is ultimately on achieving political/cultural change, not
simply preventing change. Blending all this together can be difficult, even onerous,
as when it requires incorporating national feeling, state rule, and multiple cultural
sectors and religions, plus building political and economic cohesion, any or all of
which can arouse widespread opposition. There is little or no appreciation of this in
classical deterrence theory and only limited understanding of it among practitioners
orchestrating the deterrence effort. Often failure in the broader objectives erodes
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/35252/chapter/299811708 by Georgia Institute of Technology user on 31 August 2023
56 T h e C o n c e p t o f C r o s s – D o m a i n D e t e r r e n c e
much or all of any initial success. The results are on display in too many places in
the world today.
Thus Western deterrence is often stretched thin—in capacities, the number of
states involved, cohesion in supplying the military presence, and the interventions
generated by the supplying states. Often it confronts not one opponent but several.
As a result, the deterrence applied may lack coherence, a sound structure, cohesive
policy, and even a potent pattern of action.
Classic deterrence conceptually and theoretically focused on threatening direct attacks and planning military postures to block them. General deterrence resources were available to readily support an immediate deterrence effort, sustaining
interstate stability via understood theoretical principles. Today, this deterrence,
often lacking well-established policy and less coherent in military and other action
patterns, seems unmoored from a theory and field of study with sustained practices.
The West has pursued new versions of it and faces others mounted by locals in retaliation. Those resisting want to scare the West out of invading or out of remaining
once there, not unlike what the British confronted in the American Revolution. The
intent is to block insertions of Western control, culture, ideals, and beliefs and to
shorten and conclude the process. The results have been uneven, but the West has
clearly lost considerable support along the way, at home and elsewhere.
An odd result is concern over lesser warfare situations while facing rising fears
that standard wars might return, possibly from attacks without warning. Russian
leaders talk about this; North Koreans have done so for some time. But lesser warfare is still predominant, with deterrence stretched to explain and confront lesser
forms of conflict, including such outbreaks as: periodic armed responses to limited
attacks (terrorist strikes); blockades, sanctions, and other interdictions; border military demonstrations or incursions; cyberattacks or retaliations; inserting military
forces/resources into civil or terrorist wars; major human rights violations; and suppression of civil conflicts.
On Domains
How does the concept of domain in “cross-domain deterrence” (CDD) pertain to
deterrence today? It is useful to examine the domains involved and the resulting links
to, for instance, U.S. deterrence efforts. A domain is a relatively coherent integrated
collection of knowledge, technology, practices, training, resulting capabilities, and
focused objectives. For instance, in the U.S. armed forces the term identifies distinct
clusters of knowledge, experience, objectives, preparation, responsibilities, and orderly cooperative action. Each armed service has its own domain, as may subsections
or other components. Other sections of society also have relevant domains. A crossdomain situation occurs when one domain is significantly penetrated by, overlapped
by, and interactive with another. While often complex and difficult, this may be also
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/35252/chapter/299811708 by Georgia Institute of Technology user on 31 August 2023
Past and Future of Deterrence Theory 57
innovative and rewarding in improving outcomes through expanded perceptions,
capacities, and flexibility.
Cross-domain deterrence can apply in and among services, and in interchanges
between military/security and civilian sectors. Civilian/military-cross-domain interaction has a long history in the United States. Numerous civilian domains, rife
with new ideas, products, and capacities, such as railroads, the telegraph, war bonds,
and the development and manufacture of repeating rifles, were tapped hugely by the
North in the Civil War. Cross-domain deterrence is about further upgrading this dimension in more pointed, rigorous, well-defined, and extended ways.
The introduction to this book defines a domain as “any pathway or means for
coercion that is different from other means in respect to its utility for political bargaining” and thus “might enable analysts to compare interactions between political
actors according to how like confronts like and, increasingly, how unlike confronts
unlike.” This applies to both nonmilitary and military domains, with many military units and their endeavors deeply affected by injections of nonmilitary units in
training, cyber activities, communications, management, maintenance, healthcare,
and so on. Modern forces are immersed in interactions with civilian activities, personnel, education, and even armed civilian personnel for selected operations and
services. The distance between civilian and military is eroded in a wide spectrum
of activities, making the concept of “domain” increasingly fluid and amorphous,
complicating analysis of the nature and impact of CDD. U.S. forces increasingly
incorporate civilians, and overseas operations involve civilians, many foreign—
driving, medicating, protecting, feeding, translating, and so on. Can the concept of
“domain” remain cohesive for analytical purposes as a result? All sorts of situations
have been displayed in the Iraq and Afghanistan wars, particularly when U.S. and
associated forces took over. In such situations, description and analysis of what goes
on within and between domains can be difficult to keep coherent.
Cross-Domain Deterrence
Initial work on the CDD-national security connection has focused heavily on
improving and exploiting security resources, particularly in new and emerging
technologies, plus enhancing reconsideration and application of older domains and
technologies, to facilitate preparation for and conduct of military operations as necessary.10 This can readily enhance the conduct of deterrence (and compellence).
A neglected subject in recent, but not classical, deterrence theory is not just
deterring attacks but preventing escalation of existing attacks to intolerable levels.
10 A major forerunner was the Revolution in Military Affairs. For an overview of its relationship with
deterrence, see: Michel Fortmann and Stefanie Von Hlatky, “The Revolution in Military Affairs: The
Impact of Emerging Technologies on Deterrence,” in Paul et al., Complex Deterrence, 304–319.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/35252/chapter/299811708 by Georgia Institute of Technology user on 31 August 2023
58 T h e C o n c e p t o f C r o s s – D o m a i n D e t e r r e n c e
This was a huge preoccupation in the Cold War, of course, concerning the use of nuclear weapons (by either side) and avoiding nuclear retaliation for nasty lower-level
attacks too. Recently threats to resort to such steps have been advanced by several
governments (e.g., Moscow), which is very disturbing. On conventional forces, new
kinds of threats meant to deter or curb fighting have consistently cropped up over
clashes in the Middle East.
Other deterrence complications arise because states generate and deal with a
wide variety of threats and by numerous ways that go well beyond simple threats to
fight and harm if attacked. States employ numerous ways of designing and delivering
threats for both general and immediate deterrence purposes, plus deterrence efforts
as preparations or assertions for show or as a bluff.
Key to these threats’ impact is credibility—being believed to possess the necessary forces and intent to use them or at least having them under development.11
With little or no credibility, deterrence can readily collapse. A major problem is that
credibility is not just created by the deterrer; it has to be perceived or otherwise
believed by the target, and with a sufficient effect. And there are complications.
What if the threat is credible but it is believed that the harm inflicted will be bearable, or the objective so vital that the harm must be borne anyway (as Kim Jong Un
promises)? What if preparing to possibly impose that harm or defeat appears to the
opponent as preparing to attack instead, provoking its attack as a result? But trying
hard not to convey such an image might mean failing to make the threat look tough
enough and thus credible enough. Any real deterrence policy is usually somewhat
amorphous, almost naturally given the uncertain situations considered, and that is
part of why it is not guaranteed to work.
This can be problematic for CDD contributions to deterrence, since the associated analyses of them cannot be guaranteed to fully comprehend and convey, especially in advance, all the results of added domains, their components, and their
activities. Having a clear sense of how particular CDD efforts will shape officials’
and analysts’ grasp of deterring an opponent in a particular situation and time,
and thus how best to conduct that effort, will be very valuable if attained, especially for the United States, which, for mounting or sustaining deterrence threats,
frequently wrestles with multiple current or potential opponents on a large spectrum of behavior and perception patterns. Shaping such efforts properly depends
on the adequacy and effective application of cross-domain resources. But further
study will likely note the domains often clashing or competing in security activities.
A common phenomenon in U.S. forces, defense industry sectors, and the like is
clashing views, competitive struggles, and frequent displays of ideas in advance of
adequate capabilities. Adding more domains will compound all this.
11 On credibility in general deterrence, for example, see: Morgan, Deterrence Now, 101–105.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/35252/chapter/299811708 by Georgia Institute of Technology user on 31 August 2023
Past and Future of Deterrence Theory 59
Opponents of Western deterrence policy (like Russia, China, and North Korea)
will introduce their own versions of CDD, so monitoring developments in doctrine and force development is vital. A key to deterrence stability is the opponents’
having a relatively clear understanding of each other’s military capabilities and
overall strategic perceptions and plans. This was vital in the Cold War between
the superpowers, and the recent historiography uncovering the scale and nature of
what they misunderstood about what each saw, planned, and feared, has been hairraising! Can CDD analyses and uses offer enough necessary help in deterrence in
the future in a practical, timely, and suitable fashion?
Familiar Complications
Some of the complications of CDD are familiar from previous experience with
deterrence. It is reasonable to begin with the assumption that effective deterrence
starts by sending a clear, credible message signaling a predictable outcome if the
proscribed action is carried out by the target. This assumption seems logical but
then confronts various complications. First, governments and leaders often resist
fixed deterrence postures, understandable in general deterrence but often a poor fit
in immediate deterrence efforts. They readily issue threats to prevent actions they
oppose, with hints or other evidence of their intended responses to noncompliance. Specifically stating what they will do is rare, for obvious reasons—to avoid
giving the opponent a better chance to fully prepare for what is coming, assess how
harmful it will be, and probe it for flaws. Governments and leaders want multiple
plans at least partially at hand for a crisis, given the uncertainty, plus backup plans
and room to delay before having to act, plus last minute retreat options, and so on.
Cross-domain deterrence could be considerably useful here, uncovering new or
underappreciated alternative steps, if steered in this direction.
Sometimes, the more explicit the deterrence threat, the more it antagonizes the
opponent, stiffening its determination, particularly if it is certain it is in the right
and thus entitled to attack. The threat might be taken as further evidence of how improper and dangerous the deterrer’s intent is, how arrogant or humiliating. The more
explicit and public the threat, the more difficult it is domestically and internationally for one or both parties to be seen giving in, for fear that flexibility suggests weakness: believing that backing down will encourage intransigence in one’s opponent.
Thus ambiguity is often a serious factor in such exchanges, especially when they
are often immersed in private or third-party information about the situation and
who is planning to do what. Thus a deterrence threat and response are seldom clear
and simple. Complexity is often unavoidable, especially because misperceptions
often crop up. Today’s greater complexity in weapons, intentions, intragovernmental
perceptions, and the like should add to the ambiguity, despite continued CDD escalation of information flows to try to offset it.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/35252/chapter/299811708 by Georgia Institute of Technology user on 31 August 2023
60 T h e C o n c e p t o f C r o s s – D o m a i n D e t e r r e n c e
Next, threats, and deterrence threats in response, are typically bargaining
maneuvers, bluffs, probes, and the like, adding more ambiguity. Even the government or its leaders often do not know exactly what they will do until getting very
close to doing it. Usually the task of assembling a firm foreign or domestic coalition
for an attack or responding to one is difficult, and the decisionmaking on what steps
to take is always complicated. The exact nature of the situation may be difficult to
ascertain until after an attack is launched or not. Officials on each side may have contingent plans rather than finely tuned ones.
It is not certain whether CDD elements will help to clarify such situations or
not. As available information expands, available options and also estimates of possible outcomes probably will too. Will this make for more sophisticated deterrence
strategies or designs that better fit conflict and crisis situations? Serious research
to deal with all this will be necessary. Otherwise, the desires expressed in the project statement, to develop analytically rigorous but not overly complex theory, will
likely be too ambitious.
Also notable is that while deterrence theory was initially associated mostly with
arousing an opponent’s rational decisionmaking, the accompanying fear now is
about the irrationality detected in various situations. A good example is the tension that emerged between the United States and North Korea after the election of
Donald Trump, with both sides alienating even close associates, deeply irritating
each other, and seemingly poised to violate international norms as they approached
the brink of war. There is no sign yet that CDD can enhance rationality via deterrence theory and in deterrence situations, whether nuclear weapons are involved
or not.
Another substantial problem confronting CDD starts with it having been substantially involved in the physical components involved in deterrence—military
actions, resources, technological capabilities, equipment enhancement (i.e.,
real people doing real things in real time). But a significant aspect of conducting
deterrence remains psychological, exploiting not just an opponents’ rational
decisionmaking but their emotions, fears, thought processes, and understandings
in a situation; for example, in how credibility is involved and perceived or is irrationality stimulated. Cross-domain deterrence should be evaluated as to how psychological considerations affect the conduct of deterrence through careful study and
analysis.12
Another current complication is that use of deterrence, and military retaliation when it fails, must now be undertaken with awareness of the constraints of
human rights considerations while confronting the human rights violations many of
12 For examples of the study of psychological elements of deterrence, see: Robert Jervis, “Psychology
and Security: Enduring Questions, Different Answers,” Yale Journal of International Affairs 7, no. 2
(Summer 2012): 9–15; Janice Gross Stein, “Rational Deterrence against ‘Irrational’ Adversaries? No
Common Knowledge,” in Paul et al., Complex Deterrence, 58–82.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/35252/chapter/299811708 by Georgia Institute of Technology user on 31 August 2023
Past and Future of Deterrence Theory 61
today’s opponents (Islamic State, Syria, the Taliban) relish with indifference as part
of deterring the United States and other western parties. A related element is that
many are committed to accepting death, even to seeking it out, and thus are hard
to overcome, take as prisoners, extract information from, and deter. This behavior
appears irrational, and if so, there is no consistent way to effectively deter it.
Emerging Complications
Some complications with CDD are more novel. A recurring problem will be how
public to make the development of new weapons, systems, or strategies in the fear
that they will be copied, developed, and modified too rapidly and effectively. The
United States suffers endless cyber- and other attacks seeking to steal technology,
military capabilities, defense plans, and the like. This golden age of spying and theft
is running at an ever-increasing pace.13 Another problem is that deterrence requires
that the necessary capabilities for retaliation and resistance not be overly hidden!
A secret domain of combat or potent enhancements to it, so unfamiliar to the
opponents that they have nothing comparable, may be fine for handicapping their
next attack, but it does not help get them to avoid starting it.
Another complication is that opponents may overreact when shocked by a new
capability, seeing it not as deterrence but as being poised for attack. This was how
the Kremlin reacted almost immediately to the first U.S. nuclear weapons, and such
overreaction is apparent both in the intensified Pyongyang nuclear weapons drive
and in Russia’s haste in preparing to be able to merge nuclear and conventional
forces in a future military clash with the West.
Can CDD help here? Thus far, it is not easy to see how. Cross-domain deterrence
developments almost never seem to effectively improve control over the increasing
diffusion of new knowledge, technology, information, creation, and imitation.
Many developments and much of the diffusion in and among domains are due to
brilliant self-motivated experimenters on the edges of the domains, and word of the
achievements often readily spreads, sometimes due to the lure of financial gain or
patriotism.
If well-developed theory in CDD on all this remains difficult to construct, it will
be better to concentrate on constantly updating strategy, training, and theory in expectation of technological and other domain changes and interactions with others
doing the same. Hopefully, via CDD, accepting the pace of change and its effects
will be matched by suspicions that initial grasp of oncoming developments will
13 Studies of all this include: “Deterrence in Cyberspace,” The Military Balance 2016
(London: International Institute for Strategic Studies, 2016), 16–18; Myriam Dunn Cavelty, “CyberSecurity,” in Security Studies, 4th ed., edited by Alan Collins (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2016),
400–416.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/35252/chapter/299811708 by Georgia Institute of Technology user on 31 August 2023
62 T h e C o n c e p t o f C r o s s – D o m a i n D e t e r r e n c e
typically be somewhat flimsy, with many unanticipated consequences. It is relatively
easy to envision CDD expanding and complicating security matters, particularly deterrence, as new factors encompass a wider range of information, resources, invention, and technology. But this may expand difficulty in grasping security challenges
and their surrounding intricacies, the resources needed, and how to effectively use
them. Deterrence surrounded by such changes often comes with more intense pressure. Can CDD help to cope with this?
Probably. Much time and energy in pursuing and exploiting emerging domains,
individually and in combination, is aimed at making many activities less complicated, and juggling more activities simultaneously is getting simpler via modern
communications and other technologies in numerous cross-domains. We are on
the edge of utilizing self-driving military vehicles. Many military activities using
complex technology now exploit webs of domains to accurately deliver ordinance
hundreds or thousands of miles away in a markedly simpler fashion. U.S. forces can
be smaller and less expensive yet just as powerful or more so, because they do many
things more simply and quickly. Intelligence agencies gather valuable information
(secret and otherwise) about opponents or others at an unprecedented pace and
scale, processing in unprecedented fashion.
Grasping cross-domain effects will require recognizing how often they make
things simpler and more comprehensible, when complexity is expanding or
retreating, and when and why simplicity or complexity matters the most, and in ways
that go beyond just science and technology. Modern states are more complicated to
operate. International collective actors, particularly NGOs, are more numerous and
often more influential—operating them as governments want is often quite complicated, not just in the cross-domain elements involved but because the participants
as actors are very difficult to organize. In combination, the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization (NATO) and its associates’ efforts have repeatedly demonstrated that
effective cooperation and coordination are getting more difficult to achieve and sustain. The United States found this repeatedly in the war against Serbia and again
in the war in Syria, often preferring, if possible, to do without others’ assistance.
Problems mount when relevant domains are unevenly employed or mismatched in
participants’ capabilities. Then willingness to use them can be very uneven and the
parties’ staying power inadequate.
Another likely CDD-incited complication is profound. More overlap between
civilian and military activities means that policymakers and citizens alike had better
prepare to confront domains not yet rooted or operating deeply in U.S. security affairs. This requires considering redesigning the entire range of contemporary security affairs—weapons, actions, capabilities, organization, and the like. Our security
affairs will be almost completely reshaped eventually, perhaps rapidly, tracking similar developments taking place for some time in our media, other communications,
medical care systems, and transportation. Why not also with our capacities for controlling warfare in the international system and within its members?
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/35252/chapter/299811708 by Georgia Institute of Technology user on 31 August 2023
Past and Future of Deterrence Theory 63
The Ultimate Concern Facing CDD Efforts
There has still not been a nuclear war since 1945, nor a major war of any sort between major powers, so perhaps deterrence deserves some credit. Yet for other
types of conflict, the United States and its friends and allies have apparently been
experiencing sharp declines in results from deterrence efforts because they have
either failed or achieved only limited success. This is partly due to erosions in
thinking about the nature of deterrence and its uses, impacting on the “stretching”
of deterrence. This is important for the future of CDD in light of some relevant
developments.
With less support for direct military operations, the United States now turns
more to training, special operations, protection, and various selective attacks.
Outright combat operations as in the World Wars were serious efforts, but there is
now much less of this. The favored responses to states and armed groups ignoring
U.S. deterrence pressure are less likely to involve inserting conventional ground
forces and more likely to involve using aerial or drone attacks, special operations
forays, together with displays of military threats and traditional verbal, diplomatic,
economic, and other deterrence-related threats. Even fighting such as the United
States experienced in Iraq and Afghanistan appears to be in stasis or decline in any
large scale. Yet challenges from China and Russia give pause.
When deterrence efforts are unsuccessful, one path is to tolerate the failure but
signal that the tolerance will end if the unacceptable behavior does not. Another is
to mount alternative kinds of pressure or preparations for outright military action
again—shifting to outright fighting of some sort and threats of escalation beyond—
but this would be hard to install in today’s domestic climate about fighting abroad.
And if the United States is not effectively preventing attacks, it is no longer driving a
deterrence effort, because preventing attacks is primarily what deterrence is meant
to be about. Such alternatives involve containing the status quo on a limited scale in
fighting for national security objectives because deterrence—including CDD—is
somehow seriously overstretched.14 Conducting such conflicts is very difficult. They
arouse opposition domestically and often from other allies and associates. Friction
with allies may be unavoidable as the United States finds that they are woefully inadequate for fighting or providing other sorts of support. Some friction at home
comes from citizens who support the fighting and charge that it is being fought in
too limited a fashion such that national security interests and commitments are
insufficiently protected. If support falls off, U.S. national security objectives and
14 On why such fighting often turns out badly for the United States and the West, see: Ivan ArreguinToft, “Unconventional Deterrence: How the Weak Deter the Strong,” in Paul et al., Complex Deterrence,
204–221.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/35252/chapter/299811708 by Georgia Institute of Technology user on 31 August 2023
64 T h e C o n c e p t o f C r o s s – D o m a i n D e t e r r e n c e
policies shrink, producing a corresponding shrinkage in U.S. stature and influence
abroad.
The United States is not far from this sort of situation, in view of its ongoing
but contained involvement in Syria, Iraq, and Afghanistan. It is on the edge of
shifting in this direction in relations with parts of NATO and with some allies and
associates on the North Korean situation. Disagreements with China could seriously strain U.S. deterrence in East Asia and Southeast Asia. The United States
faces the revival of aspects of the Cold War with Russia that is already provoking
expanded U.S. defense spending, military planning, force distributions, and readiness. There is considerable interest in restoring aspects of the Cold War, such as
sharply upgrading nuclear weapons in the United States and military capabilities
for deterrence purposes in Europe. This is still at a preliminary stage, including the
associated capacities of CDD.
CDD-D?
Given the stretching of deterrence in theory and practice, the proper title for the
CDD project may turn out to be CDD-D, or cross-domain deterrence and (national) defense. The concept and strategy of deterrence, originally and obviously meant to prevent attacks, now embraces a wide range of fighting, from real
attacks involving extensive, perhaps very destructive, warfare to those primarily
encompassing lesser threatening conflicts, some with no fighting at all. How the
CDD concept has been applied thus far falls mainly within the scope of the original CDD objectives—delivery of ever more flexibility and innovation across the
spectrum of national security, intelligence, military affairs, and related activities
by exploiting emerging capabilities and developments in interactive, overlapping
domains. But it is on the edge of or even somewhat beyond this already complex
set of developments that CDD will have to be used, given the general weakening of
deterrence and the broader security threat facing the West.
United States deterrence efforts are now either only barely satisfactory or seriously unsatisfactory, and thus frustrating for policymakers, and often dangerous for
national security. Policymakers cannot be counted on to sufficiently embrace CDD
and to sufficiently adapt in practice and action to meet changing conflict situations
soundly. They also cannot be counted on to reliably accommodate necessary domestic conditions and reactions in the United States as either deterrer or target.
Deterrence theory has not yet fully grasped the future of deterrence practices or
fully anticipated the specific threats it will be necessary to confront. Global security
conditions are too fluid and unpredictable, as are the domestic and international
political conditions.
The ultimate example of the stretching of deterrence, and of having to face a potentially greater threat that it can pose, lies in the rapidly developing cyber world.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/35252/chapter/299811708 by Georgia Institute of Technology user on 31 August 2023
Past and Future of Deterrence Theory 65
Major governments, especially the United States, have seriously focused in recent
years on exploiting cyberspace in their ongoing rivalries. A cyber-related struggle
has been under way for roughly fifteen years over major governments’ information
capacities, thefts of their secrets, how to damage each other’s networks, and the crux
of their operations and crucial civilian and military technologies should serious
warfare break out, with each government seeking to be able to effectively disrupt
the others’ capacities first.
Most critical here is the application of cyber capabilities to many specific aspects
of war and cyber warfare: disabling or defending against air and missile attacks (degrading or destroying the missiles and planes), disrupting or destroying military
information operations, disabling or destroying political administration structures.
Equally critical is the capacity to mount preventive or preemptive attacks, because cyber warfare can be initiated and applied almost instantly, and thus its
crucial components must be delivered first. Acquiring necessary information on
an oncoming attack is the key to performing the other steps—such as destruction of enemy nuclear command, control, and communication (NC3) and information resources. Thus the cyberattack threat is expanding, such attacks having
been perceived for some time as serious candidates for crippling nuclear weapons
capabilities, particularly missiles. Ahead is a possible clash of cyber capabilities at
every level of international affairs in the cyber-dominated world.
Similar bursts of change in numerous other dimensions will deeply affect not
only deterrence and military affairs but also many other components of the planet’s
environment. An example is the growing problem of space debris: the vast amount
and variety of materials that have steadily been inserted over time in space, are still
there, and are rapidly accumulating as more governments and private enterprises
use outer space. This is why the United States must seriously undertake further development and application of CDD (or CDD-D) and why it needs more analysis,
application, and refinement—as rapidly as possible. Global security management
as a whole is clearly in need of repair, and cyber developments are reshaping the
world, including vast changes that extend to security, military capabilities, and the
capacities to protect national welfare, particularly via deterrence. They are simultaneously multiplying vulnerabilities for international systems occupants—not just
attack vulnerabilities but deterrence vulnerabilities. There is much here to consider
and much to be done.15
15 On cyber developments and deterrence, surveying two important new books on the subject, see: Susan Hennessey, “Deterring Cyberattacks: How to Reduce Vulnerability,” Foreign
Affairs (November/December 2017): 39–46; Greg Austin and Pavel Sharikov, “‘Pre-emption Is
Victory’: Aggravated Nuclear Instability of the Information Age,” Nonproliferation Review 23, nos. 5–6
(2016): 691–704.
